	A group of fifty black conservatives called a press conference the day before Super Tuesday to urge Governor Mike Huckabee to stay in the GOP race. Two weeks before, on Martin Luther King Day, another group of African American Pastors endorsed Huckabee for President. And during his long tenure as Governor of Arkansas, Huckabee earned what is believed to be the greatest share of the black vote of any Republican since the 1930’s.
 

Last week, Mike Huckabee, the always-affable funny guy, made an impromptu joke that bombed badly. While giving a speech to the NRA, he heard a loud sound from behind the stage that startled the audience. Reacting to the unexpected sound, the quick-witted Huckabee thought up a rambling one-liner that turned unfunny very quickly. He explained that the sound came from Barack Obama ducking someone who was holding a gun. The joke would have carried less baggage and might have been considered funny by more people if he had picked someone other than the black Presidential candidate who has been receiving threats throughout his candidacy. But the joke got widespread attention and within hours, clips of his remarks were all over the web and all over the news. Huckabee immediately made an unconditional apology, admitting that he screwed up and that he meant nothing by it. Over the weekend, he also apologized personally to Senator Obama, who told him not to worry and that he knew he meant no ill will.

It was a one day story.

The press let it go. Black leaders kept quiet and did not give Huckabee a hard time about it. A few people on the web tried to escalate the situation but were overwhelmed by many more who spoke up to defend Mike and accept his apology. It seems like almost everybody knew that Mike had simply made up a very bad joke without thinking about its context and that there wasn’t anything else to it. And the way people have reacted to the Huckabee gaffe illustrates something interesting about him as well as a lesson for the rest of us. When you build a long reputation for seeking racial harmony, people tend to give you the benefit of the doubt when you make a mistake.

 

Rejecting Jim Crow

Mike Huckabee was born and raised in Hope, Arkansas, the same town in which Bill Clinton was born. He grew up at a time that the south was still deeply segregated. However, Huckabee was personally ashamed of the racist views and policies that were present at the time. As a young man, he was remembered by those who knew him as a kid who despised racist language and attitudes.


REPORT THIS AD

When he became the Pastor of the Immanuel Baptist Church, he gave sermons chastising Christians for failing to speak out firmly against racism. As his ministry grew and his sermons were broadcast on the radio, a young black man who heard him on the air wanted to worship with the all-white congregation. Pastor Huckabee welcomed him to the church. However, some of the other ministry leaders were extremely upset by this and didn’t even want the black parishioner to sit with them. Rev. Huckabee, who earned a nice salary, threatened to resign as Pastor unless the young man was accepted and greeted with love. Most of the congregation followed his lead and the church eventually became integrated.

A decade later, Huckabee became the Governor of Arkansas when Jim Guy Tucker resigned in 1996. The following year marked the forty year anniversary of the integration of Little Rock Central High School and the new Governor was invited to speak along with President Clinton at a nationally televised commemoration ceremony. The Governor gave a speech that, according to Newsweek, moved many who were present to tears. Huckabee denounced the racist policies that tormented the Little Rock Nine and criticized the church organizations that not only refused to intervene but that added fuel to the fire of racism. He stated “… and today, we call upon every church, every pulpit, every synagogue, every mosque in every part of Arkansas and the rest of the world to say never, never, never, never again will we be silent when people’s rights are at stake.”

 

The Politics of Inclusion

Election night 1998 was not such a good night for the national Republican Party. The party maintained its total of 55 Senate seats but lost five House seats and lowered its count of Governorships by one in the wake of the Clinton/Lewinski scandal. But that evening was a very good one for Governor Huckabee, who won his first elected term with 60% of the popular vote. But it was the exit polls that revealed a more unexpected figure. Governor Huckabee became only the state’s third elected Republican Governor since Reconstruction with the help of 48 percent of African American voters. He essentially split the black vote with his Democratic challenger.

To put this in context, that same night, all but two of the other Republican Gubernatorial candidates who won had received less than 20% of the African American vote. Six others got between 10% and 20% of the black vote and thirteen others got too little in the exit polls to measure (although some governed states with very few black residents). But what is especially interesting about Huckabee’s numbers is the fact that he managed to do this in a southern state that was dominated by the Democratic Party and by the Clintons. Bill Clinton was the most popular political figure in the country among black voters at the time, was the incumbent President of the United States and supported Huckabee’s opponent. The Governor not only won in spite of all this but managed to break the trend in which almost all black voters vote for the Democrat.

Huckabee left office in January of 2007 and later that month launched his long-shot and severely underfunded bid for the Presidency. He continued to win attention and praise throughout the year with his impressive performance in a long series of Presidential Debates. And then in September, PBS hosted a GOP Presidential Debate with a focus on Minority Issues, which was held at Morgan State University in Baltimore and moderated by a panel that included Tavis Smiley and Fox News’ Juan Williams. Many Republicans shied away from the concept of spending the night answering questions from black voters – in fact, the top four leading candidates declined to participate (commentator Pat Buchanan stated “there is a risk going to this gathering here, and there’s very little reward … I can understand why they don’t go down there and get asked about affirmative action”). But Huckabee, who seemingly could barely afford the plane ticket, participated eagerly and earned rave reviews. He first attempted to soothe the badly hurt feelings of rejection that many experienced as the result of being snubbed by the four leading candidates. He stated “frankly, I’m embarrassed. I’m embarrassed for our party and I’m embarrassed for those who did not come, because there’s long been a divide in this country, and it doesn’t get better when we don’t show up.” He then voiced his knowledge of and concern for issues such as substance abuse and disparity in sentencing. And although he opposes Affirmative Action (which did not even come up as a topic), Huckabee earned rounds of applause from the audience for the way he carried himself. He even won praise from Dr. Cornel West, a well-known supporter of Barack Obama.


REPORT THIS AD

 

Give and it will be given unto you

Huckabee’s willingness and eagerness to engage and interact with all voters has earned him the reciprocity of unprecedented public support from black voters for a Republican candidate over the past several decades.

Tavis Smiley was clearly impressed. After Governor Huckabee shocked the political world by winning the Iowa Caucuses, Tavis spoke at length about him on the radio, praising him for not being “afraid” to interact with blacks and to actively ask for our votes. Although clearly not a Republican, Smiley suggested that his listeners take a look at Mike Huckabee and pay attention to him. He suggested that Huck was the best Republican candidate in many years.

On the Martin Luther King holiday, Huckabee took some valuable time off the campaign trail to attend a tribute service for the slain leader. While John McCain, Mitt Romney and Rudy Giuliani were campaigning heavily in advance of the Florida contest, Governor Huckabee put aside campaigning for half of the day so that he could attend the ceremony with former President Bill Clinton. But unlike Clinton, Huckabee did not speak but simply sat with members of the King Family. After leaving the service, Huckabee received the endorsements of three dozen African American clergy.

The day before Super Tuesday, a group of conservative blacks scheduled a press conference at the National Press Club to plead for Governor Huckabee to remain in the Presidential contest. Many in the group expressed a clear preference for the Presidency of Mike Huckabee over that of either Barack Obama or Mitt Romney.

Three days after Huckabee announced the suspension of his Presidential bid, widely-respected former Oklahoma Congressman J.C. Watts wrote an article titled “Missing Mike Huckabee already.”  He wrote in his column that “Mike Huckabee spoke to so many issues that I’ve been trying to get the GOP establishment to speak to as a black, a social conservative and an opportunity conservative.”

Some blogger even started a site called “Hip Hop 4 Huckabee,” apparently an effort to get young black voters to take a serious look at conservative Republican Huckabee. Also, at least a few of the former Governor’s most loyal Internet supporters (Huck’s Army), are conservatives who happen to be black – including myself. And because most black voters describe themselves as either conservative or moderate, the GOP has a tremendous potential to compete for a large number of non-liberal votes that go to the Democratic Party by default.

 

Comfortable in his own skin

It seems as if many politicians have developed their own special “techniques” for talking with black voters. A number of prominent Democratic politicians have seemed to try to channel some type of southern Baptist preacher persona when speaking to black audiences. It’s a little strange to see people who rarely raise their voices above conversation level suddenly transform into fire-breathing revivalists when they come to converse with black voters.

A number of prominent Republicans have taken a very different approach. They haven’t showed up at all. And sadly, there are some political leaders who think that they need to “talk black” when going to black communities (a recent example involved one candidate who wanted to talk about his “bling.”).

Mike Huckabee has in my opinion the most impressive approach of all. He shows up. And then he speaks to black voters the same way he talks to everybody else.

 

Goodwill

When the news of the Reverend Wright sermons first broke the headlines, Huckabee earned the appreciation of Obama supporters by defending the Senator and suggesting that he shouldn’t be held accountable for his Pastor’s remarks. Many Obama supporters have expressed appreciation at Huckabee’s refusal to pile on when the Democratic candidate was at his lowest point. In addition, Clinton supporters have seen the good nature of Huckabee as he defended her against pressure to withdraw from the contest. Huckabee has showed class in many ways throughout his campaign and has built up for himself a resovoir of goodwill among many voters. Many people disagree with his policies or statements. But many of these same people will acknowledge that he’s far from a mean guy.

Mike Huckabee has made racial healing a theme not only of his campaign but of his life and career. And he didn’t wait until it was time to ask for votes to behave that way. And through years of reaching out and trying to build bridges, Huckabee has also built a few things for himself that everyone who makes impromptu jokes needs. The benefit of the doubt. And a solid reputation that can’t be sullied by a gaffe.