First published in 1768, the Encyclopædia Britannica has long been the standard by which all
other reference works are judged.  It represents a tradition of excellence that was built, over 
the centuries, on meticulous scholarship and unmatched attention to detail.  Today,
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., produces a range of fine products for reference, education, and
learning in different media and in many different languages. Wherever you see the Britannica
name—in print, on the Internet, CD-ROM, or DVD—it is your guarantee of quality, accuracy,
and authority.
© 2006 BY ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
Copyright Under International Copyright Union
All Rights Reserved Under International and Universal Copyright Conventions
by Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2006921235
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-59339-492-9
The original edition of this book, created in conjunction with Merriam-Webster, Incorporated, was published
in 2000 as Merriam-Webster ’s Collegiate Encyclopedia. 
No part of this work may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publisher.
Encyclopædia Britannica and other fine products are available on the Internet at http://www.britannica.com.
(Trademark Reg. U.S. Pat. Off.) Printed in Peru.
Contents
Foreword
Explanatory Notes
Abbreviations
Pronunciation Symbols
Guide to Plates and Map Legend
Britannica Concise Encyclopedia
Encyclopædia Britannica Corporate Page
Merriam-Webster Editorial Staff
Foreword
T he need for information and the craving
for knowledge are timeless and univer-
sal. The Britannica Concise Encyclopedia
satisfies the essence of both these needs.
This volume represents the distillation of
essential information into a compact and eminently
useful single volume.
This latest version of Britannica Concise Encyclopedia
answers today’s need for a portable, convenient ref-
erence work covering history, geography, the sci-
ences, religion, sports, entertainment, technology,
and the arts. We hope it will become a favourite
source for helping students with their homework,
for background to news events, for writers and
crossword-puzzle enthusiasts, for solving disputes,
and for random browsing.
This printing of Britannica Concise Encyclopedia has
been broadly revised. Among the 2.8 million words
that make up the nearly 28,000 entries are many
new titles and many that have been updated. In the
16-page colour plates section, you will find the
newest versions of national flags as well as a
world map, maps of world religions and popula-
tion characteristics, a selection of World Heritage
sites, and a useful world map depicting interna-
tional time zones. More than 30 tables catalog
everything from Nobel Prize winners to chemical
elements to popes to the International System of
Units of measurement and their U.S. equivalents.
Many of the more than 190 maps have been
revised, and all of the more than 150 illustrations
have been redrawn. The more than 2,000 photo-
graphs enhance both the appearance and content
of Britannica Concise.
The editors of Encyclopædia Britannica are proud
to present the Britannica Concise Encyclopedia. We
hope that you will consult it often and that it will
both satisfy your immediate need for information
and lead you to the in-depth information of the 40
million words of the Encyclopædia Britannica.
Creating the highest level of reference works has
been our goal for 238 years, and we are pleased to
welcome you to the Britannica family.
Anita Wolff
Editor
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
older and generally discarded name for an entity,
usually a geographical locale. The label officially
indicates a formal or legal version of a name. The
label in full precedes a fully spelled-out version of a
name that is usually encountered in its shorter
form. A label consisting of a language name pre-
cedes a native version or spelling of a name or term.
Biographical entry headwords in particular may
employ parentheses in several ways. Parentheses
may enclose portions of a person’s name that are
rarely used, a person’s original given name or
names, a later addition such as a title, or transla-
tions of titles or epithets. 
drum or croaker
Odin or Wotan 
Bacall, Lauren orig. Betty Joan Perske 
O’Connell, Daniel known as the Liberator 
Iqaluit formerly Frobisher Bay
Latvia officially Republic of Latvia 
OCR in full optical character recognition
fax in full facsimile
Magellan, Strait of Spanish Estrecho de 
Magallanes
Odysseus Roman Ulysses
Connelly, Marc(us Cook)
Doctorow, E(dgar) L(aurence)
Hughes,  (James Mercer) Langston
Basil II known as Basil Bulgaroctonus (“Slayer of
the Bulgars”) 
Pronunciations. Entries for terms and names
whose pronunciation the encyclopedia’s likely
users might hesitate over are supplied with pro-
nunciations. Foreign names or terms that are pro-
nounced in a markedly different way by native
speakers and English-speakers are frequently pro-
vided with two pronunciations, one of them pre-
ceded by a language label (e.g., English, French,
Spanish). Thus, for Hassan II we provide the pro-
Alphabetization.
The articles are alphabetized
word by word, with further alphabetizing letter by
letter within a word.  A “word” is here defined as a
unit of one or more characters set off from other
words by spaces, dashes, hyphens, or other symbols.
Entry titles consisting of more than one word are
arranged in alphabetical order of the succeeding
words.  Titles with identical spellings are arranged in
the order (1) persons, (2) places, and (3) things. The
following list illustrates the word-by-word principle:
Horn, Cape
Horn of Africa 
hornbill
Horne, Lena
horned toad
Hornsby, Rogers
Further alphabetization rules include the follow-
ing: (1) Diacritics, apostrophes, dashes, periods,
and ampersands are ignored in alphabetization. (2)
Names of monarchs and popes that are identical
except for the Roman numeral following the name
are ordered numerically. (3) Names beginning with
Mac- and Mc- are ordered literally, all names begin-
ning with Mac- preceding (by a number of pages)
all names beginning with Mc-. (4) Entry headwords
beginning with numbers are alphabetized as if they
were spelled out.
Entry headword style. Variant spellings or ver-
sions of the encyclopedia’s entry headwords are
printed in boldface type when they are in common
use; more obscure variants are printed in ordinary
roman type. No effort has been made to be exhaus-
tive in listing variants.
Several italicized terms are used to discriminate
among the variants. The label or simply indicates a
common alternative name or spelling. The label
orig. precedes the birth name of a person who is
entered under a name that was adopted or acquired
subsequently. When a person’s original surname is
different from the name in the principal headword,
the entire birth name is given, not enclosed in
parentheses. The label known as precedes a common
way of referring to a person that may never have
had formal status. The label formerly indicates an
Chinese names are almost always transcribed
according to the Pinyin system. Where a Chinese
name or term appears as a headword, the older
Wade-Giles spelling is given as an or variant.  Place-
names and biographical names on Taiwan, howev-
er, are generally listed in their Wade-Giles spelling,
with the Pinyin spelling as a variant. A few Chinese
names widely used in English (e.g., Confucius)
retain their traditional English spelling.
Britannica
CONCISE
ENCYCLOPEDIA
Front cover: (clockwise from top row, le f t ) Vincenzo
 Images;
 Ange rmaye r ;
Hans Hinz, Basel; Sean Ga l lup /Ge t ty Images;
courtesy of the
Germany, John F. Shrawder/Shostal. Back cover:
NA SA / J P L ;
 P ramod
Chandra; Anthony Mercieca from The National
Audubon Society Collection/Photo Researchers;
J.C. Allen and Son; Stephen
Researchers.
Britannica
CONCISE
ENCYCLOPEDIA
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Chicago • London • New Delhi • Paris • Seoul • Sydney • Taipei • Tokyo
Britannica
CONCISE
ENCYCLOPEDIA
Encyclopædia Britannica
First published in 1768, the Encyclopædia Britannica has long been the standard by which all
other reference works are judged.  It represents a tradition of excellence that was built, over 
the centuries, on meticulous scholarship and unmatched attention to detail.  Today,
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., produces a range of fine products for reference, education, and
learning in different media and in many different languages. Wherever you see the Britannica
name—in print, on the Internet, CD-ROM, or DVD—it is your guarantee of quality, accuracy,
and authority.
© 2006 BY ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
Copyright Under International Copyright Union
All Rights Reserved Under International and Universal Copyright Conventions
by Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2006921235
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-59339-492-9
The original edition of this book, created in conjunction with Merriam-Webster, Incorporated, was published
in 2000 as Merriam-Webster ’s Collegiate Encyclopedia. 
No part of this work may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publisher.
Encyclopædia Britannica and other fine products are available on the Internet at http://www.britannica.com.
(Trademark Reg. U.S. Pat. Off.) Printed in Peru.
Contents
Foreword
Explanatory Notes
Abbreviations
Pronunciation Symbols
Guide to Plates and Map Legend
Britannica Concise Encyclopedia
Encyclopædia Britannica Corporate Page
Merriam-Webster Editorial Staff
Foreword
T he need for information and the craving
for knowledge are timeless and univer-
sal. The Britannica Concise Encyclopedia
satisfies the essence of both these needs.
This volume represents the distillation of
essential information into a compact and eminently
useful single volume.
This latest version of Britannica Concise Encyclopedia
answers today’s need for a portable, convenient ref-
erence work covering history, geography, the sci-
ences, religion, sports, entertainment, technology,
and the arts. We hope it will become a favourite
source for helping students with their homework,
for background to news events, for writers and
crossword-puzzle enthusiasts, for solving disputes,
and for random browsing.
This printing of Britannica Concise Encyclopedia has
been broadly revised. Among the 2.8 million words
that make up the nearly 28,000 entries are many
new titles and many that have been updated. In the
16-page colour plates section, you will find the
newest versions of national flags as well as a
world map, maps of world religions and popula-
tion characteristics, a selection of World Heritage
sites, and a useful world map depicting interna-
tional time zones. More than 30 tables catalog
everything from Nobel Prize winners to chemical
elements to popes to the International System of
Units of measurement and their U.S. equivalents.
Many of the more than 190 maps have been
revised, and all of the more than 150 illustrations
have been redrawn. The more than 2,000 photo-
graphs enhance both the appearance and content
of Britannica Concise.
The editors of Encyclopædia Britannica are proud
to present the Britannica Concise Encyclopedia. We
hope that you will consult it often and that it will
both satisfy your immediate need for information
and lead you to the in-depth information of the 40
million words of the Encyclopædia Britannica.
Creating the highest level of reference works has
been our goal for 238 years, and we are pleased to
welcome you to the Britannica family.
Anita Wolff
Editor
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
older and generally discarded name for an entity,
usually a geographical locale. The label officially
indicates a formal or legal version of a name. The
label in full precedes a fully spelled-out version of a
name that is usually encountered in its shorter
form. A label consisting of a language name pre-
cedes a native version or spelling of a name or term.
Biographical entry headwords in particular may
employ parentheses in several ways. Parentheses
may enclose portions of a person’s name that are
rarely used, a person’s original given name or
names, a later addition such as a title, or transla-
tions of titles or epithets. 
drum or croaker
Odin or Wotan 
Bacall, Lauren orig. Betty Joan Perske 
O’Connell, Daniel known as the Liberator 
Iqaluit formerly Frobisher Bay
Latvia officially Republic of Latvia 
OCR in full optical character recognition
fax in full facsimile
Magellan, Strait of Spanish Estrecho de 
Magallanes
Odysseus Roman Ulysses
Connelly, Marc(us Cook)
Doctorow, E(dgar) L(aurence)
Hughes,  (James Mercer) Langston
Basil II known as Basil Bulgaroctonus (“Slayer of
the Bulgars”) 
Pronunciations. Entries for terms and names
whose pronunciation the encyclopedia’s likely
users might hesitate over are supplied with pro-
nunciations. Foreign names or terms that are pro-
nounced in a markedly different way by native
speakers and English-speakers are frequently pro-
vided with two pronunciations, one of them pre-
ceded by a language label (e.g., English, French,
Spanish). Thus, for Hassan II we provide the pro-
Alphabetization.
The articles are alphabetized
word by word, with further alphabetizing letter by
letter within a word.  A “word” is here defined as a
unit of one or more characters set off from other
words by spaces, dashes, hyphens, or other symbols.
Entry titles consisting of more than one word are
arranged in alphabetical order of the succeeding
words.  Titles with identical spellings are arranged in
the order (1) persons, (2) places, and (3) things. The
following list illustrates the word-by-word principle:
Horn, Cape
Horn of Africa 
hornbill
Horne, Lena
horned toad
Hornsby, Rogers
Further alphabetization rules include the follow-
ing: (1) Diacritics, apostrophes, dashes, periods,
and ampersands are ignored in alphabetization. (2)
Names of monarchs and popes that are identical
except for the Roman numeral following the name
are ordered numerically. (3) Names beginning with
Mac- and Mc- are ordered literally, all names begin-
ning with Mac- preceding (by a number of pages)
all names beginning with Mc-. (4) Entry headwords
beginning with numbers are alphabetized as if they
were spelled out.
Entry headword style. Variant spellings or ver-
sions of the encyclopedia’s entry headwords are
printed in boldface type when they are in common
use; more obscure variants are printed in ordinary
roman type. No effort has been made to be exhaus-
tive in listing variants.
Several italicized terms are used to discriminate
among the variants. The label or simply indicates a
common alternative name or spelling. The label
orig. precedes the birth name of a person who is
entered under a name that was adopted or acquired
subsequently. When a person’s original surname is
different from the name in the principal headword,
the entire birth name is given, not enclosed in
parentheses. The label known as precedes a common
way of referring to a person that may never have
had formal status. The label formerly indicates an
Chinese names are almost always transcribed
according to the Pinyin system. Where a Chinese
name or term appears as a headword, the older
Wade-Giles spelling is given as an or variant.  Place-
names and biographical names on Taiwan, howev-
er, are generally listed in their Wade-Giles spelling,
with the Pinyin spelling as a variant. A few Chinese
names widely used in English (e.g., Confucius)
retain their traditional English spelling.
Japanese names and terms are generally transcribed
according to the Hepburn system but without
macrons to indicate vowel length.
Russian names and terms generally observe tradi-
tional Western spellings and follow the diacritic-
free system employed by the U.S. Board on
Geographic Names. 
Arabic names and terms generally follow the best-
established Western usage. Except in a few well-
established Western transliterations, the l in the arti-
cle al- or el- (“the”) is not assimilated to a following
consonant (thus, we employ the spelling Harun al-
Rashid, not Harun ar-Rashid), even though such
assimilation reflects Arabic pronunciation and is
sometimes encountered in English sources.
Cross-references. Cross-references to other articles
are indicated by small capitals in sans-serif type for
the alphabetized element of the term or name. Thus,
“J. VON NEUMANN” sends the reader to the V’s, “J. W.
von GOETHE” to the G’s; “CAPE BRETON ISLAND” sends the
reader to the C’s, “Cape of GOOD HOPE” to the G’s;
and so on. In the case of personal names in which
there is no ambiguity as to alphabetical placement,
the entire name appears in small capitals.
A term is cross-referenced only when it is likely that
the reader of the article within which the cross-ref-
erence appears would want to be notified about the
additional article. Hence many terms for which
there are corresponding entries are not highlighted
as references. For instance, in the article on Tim
Berners-Lee, we have cross-referenced “World Wide
Web” (whose invention was his principal achieve-
ment) but not “Internet,” which is naturally cross-
referenced within the “World Wide Web” article.
Because cross-referencing of this kind is discre-
tionary, readers should not assume that a noun
lacks its own entry simply because it is not refer-
enced within the article being read.
For the sake of saving space, many people who
receive their own entries have their given names
abbreviated and their surnames in small capitals
when they are mentioned in an article, regardless of
how likely the reader of the article is to want to be
alerted to the biographical entry. The names of
countries, U.S. states, and Canadian provinces, by
contrast, are virtually never referenced, regardless
of their centrality to a given article, on the pre-
sumption that readers will correctly assume that the
encyclopedia contains articles on all such entities.
Some 3,000 cross-references are provided at their
own alphabetical place, to direct the reader who has
looked up a variant version of the name or has
expected an entry to be alphabetized according to
an element other than the one actually used.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Abbreviations
anno Domini
Admiral
Alabama
Amer. American
Ariz.
Arizona
Arkansas
before Christ
Celsius
circa
California
Capt.
captain
cubic centimetre(s)
century, centuries
cent.
centimetre(s)
Company, County
Colorado, Colonel
Conn. Connecticut
Corp.
Corporation
cubic
District of Columbia
Delaware
Doctor
exempli gratia (for example)
estimate, estimated
Ethiopia
Fahrenheit
flourished
Florida
foot, feet
gram(s)
Georgia
General
Governor
id est (that is)
Illinois
inch(es)
Indiana
Junior
Kelvin
Kansas
kilogram(s)
kilometre(s)
kilometres per hour
Kentucky
Louisiana
lb, lbs
pound, pounds
metre(s)
M.A. Master of Arts
Major
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Mass. Massachusetts
Maryland
Maine
mile(s)
Mich. Michigan
Minn. Minnesota
Miss. Mississippi
millilitre(s)
millimetre(s)
Missouri
Mont. Montana
miles per hour
North
North Carolina
North Dakota
northeastern
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
northwestern
New York
Okla.
Oklahoma
Oregon
ounce(s)
Pennsylvania
Ph.D.
Doctor of Philosophy
Pres.
President
Queen. Queensland
reigned, ruled
Reverend
Rhode Island
South
South Carolina
South Dakota
southeastern
Senator
square
Saint
southwestern
Tenn.
Tennessee
United Nations
United States
Virginia
versus
Vermont
West Virginia
Wash. Washington
Wisc. Wisconsin
Wyoming
banana, collide, abut, humdrum
Guide to Plates
Flags of the World
World Political Map
World Religions Map
World Population Density Map
World Indigenous Skin Color Map
World Heritage sites
International Time Zones
Plates
1 – 9
Plates
10 – 11
Plate
Plate
Plate
Plates
14 – 15
Plate
Map Legend
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
This page intentionally left blank 
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
A Coruña
!Abb)s
dian prime minister (1891–92). Educated at McGill University in Mon-
treal, he became a lawyer in 1847 and was made queen’s counsel in 1862.
He was dean of McGill University law school from 1855 to 1880. After
serving in the legislative assembly (1857–74, 1880–87), he was appointed
to the Senate and became government leader. Upon the death of JOHN
MACDONALD, he became the compromise choice for prime minister. Ill
health forced his resignation in 1892.
abbreviation Shortened form of a written word or phrase used in place
of the whole. Abbreviations began to proliferate in the 19th century and
have been prevalent since; they are employed to reduce the time required
for writing or speaking, especially when referring to the myriad new
organizations, bureaucratic entities, and technological products typical of
industrial societies. An abbreviation can now easily become a word, either
as an initialism in which the letters are pronounced individually (e.g., TV
or FBI) or as an acronym in which the letters are combined into syllables
(e.g., scuba, laser, or NAFTA).
ABC in full American Broadcasting Co. Major U.S. television
network. It began when the expanding national radio network NBC split
into the separate Red and Blue networks in 1928. To avoid a communi-
cations monopoly, NBC was forced to sell the Blue network in 1941. Its
buyer, Edward J. Noble, maker of Life-Savers candies, gave the company
its present name. After merging with United Paramount Theaters in 1953,
ABC expanded into the emerging television industry and soon became
one of the three top networks. It specialized in sports broadcasting and
developed the instant replay in 1961. It was bought by Capital Cities
Communications in 1985 and by the Walt Disney Co. in 1995.
!Abd al-!Azlz ibn !Abd al-Raem)n ibn FayÆal 0l Sa!)d See
IBN SA!ãD
!Abd al-Malik ibn Marw)n
Abbott, Bud; and Costello, Lou orig. William Alexander
Abbott, Sir
John (Joseph
Caldwell) (b. March 12, 1821, St.
Andrews, Lower Canada—d. Oct. 30, 1893, Montreal, Que., Can.) Cana-
ama, which included about 1,400 paintings. Favoured at court, in 1576
he was appointed master of the mint, and in 1584 he was made dlw)n
(revenue commissioner) of Multan.
!Abd All)h
Abenaki
DIAMOND, CORUNDUM, EMER Y) or synthetic (e.g., silicon CARBIDE or CARBORUN-
DUM, synthetic diamond, alumina—a synthetic form of corundum). They
range from the relatively soft particles used in household cleansers and
jeweler’s polish to diamonds.
Abruzzo
Abnaki See ABENAKI
abnormal psychology or psychopathology Branch of psychol-
LEAF WHITTIER, former slaves such as FREDERICK DOUGLASS, and HARRIET BEECHER
STOWE. The election of ABRAHAM LINCOLN, who opposed the spread of sla-
very to the West, marked a turning point in the movement. Convinced
that their way of life was threatened, the Southern states seceded from the
Union (see SECESSION), which led to the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR. In 1863 Lin-
coln (who had never been an abolitionist) issued the EMANCIPATION PROC-
LAMATION, which freed slaves held in the Confederate states; the 13th
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution (1865) prohibited slavery through-
out the country. Slavery was abolished in Latin America by 1888. In some
parts of Africa and in much of the Islamic world, it persisted as a legal
institution well into the 20th century.
Abominable Snowman Tibetan Yeti Mythical monster believed to
inhabit the HIMALAYAS near the snow line. The Yeti is thought to resemble
an oversized man covered with shaggy fur. Reported sightings are rare;
evidence of its existence consists largely of unusual footprints left in the
snow, probably the tracks of bears. At certain gaits, bears place the hind-
foot partly over the imprint of the forefoot, thus creating tracks that
resemble the footprints of a very large primate heading in the opposite
direction.
Aborigine See AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINAL
abortion Expulsion of a fetus from the uterus before it can survive on
its own. Spontaneous abortion at earlier stages of pregnancy is called MIS-
CARRIAGE. Induced abortions often occur through intentional medical inter-
vention and are performed to preserve the woman’s life or health, to
prevent the completion of a pregnancy resulting from rape or incest, to
prevent the birth of a child with serious medical problems, or because the
woman does not believe she is in a position to rear a child properly. The
drug RU-486, if taken within a few weeks of conception, will trigger a
miscarriage. Up to about 19 weeks of pregnancy, injections of saline
solutions or hormones may be used to stimulate uterine contractions that
will expel the fetus. Surgical removal of the contents of the uterus may
be performed in the second trimester or later. Intact dilation and extrac-
tion procedures may occur in the third trimester; sometimes critically
referred to as “partial-birth abortions,” they have been very controversial.
Other abortion procedures include manual vacuum aspiration (extraction
by manual syringe) and dilation and suction curettage (extraction by
machine-operated suction), both of which can be performed in early preg-
abscess
ing from various discontented groups, he succeeded in overthrowing the
last Umayyad caliph, Marw)n II (750), and was rewarded with the gov-
ernorship of Khor)s)n. His popularity led the second !Abb)sid caliph,
al-ManÆHr, to view him as a threat and have him put to death. See also
!ABB0SID DYNASTY.
Ab) Qlr
Acadian orogeny
Accra
Acheulean
Acosta
actinide
acupressure or shiatsu
Adams, Charles Francis (b. Aug. 18, 1807, Boston, Mass., U.S.—d.
Nov. 21, 1886, Boston) U.S. diplo-
mat. The son of JOHN QUINCY ADAMS
and the grandson of JOHN ADAMS, he
served in the Massachusetts legisla-
ture and edited a Whig journal. He
helped form the antislavery FREE-SOIL
PARTY and in 1848 was chosen its can-
didate for U.S. vice president. As
ambassador to Britain (1861–68) he
was instrumental in securing Brit-
ain’s neutrality during the American
Civil War and in promoting the arbi-
tration of the ALABAMA CLAIMS.
Adams, Gerry orig. Gerard
Adams (b. Oct. 6, 1948, Belfast,
N.Ire.) Irish nationalist and president
of SINN FÉIN, the political wing of the
IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (IRA). He was
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, WASHINGTON, D.C.
Charles Francis Adams
delegate to the CONTINENTAL CONGRESS
INDEPENDENCE.
John Adams, oil painting by Gilbert
Stuart, 1826; in the National Collec-
tion of Fine Arts, Washington, D.C.
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS,
SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION, WASHINGTON D.C.
Adams (cid:2) Adamson
MUTINY case.
Adamson, Joy orig. Joy-Friederike Victoria Gessner (b. Jan.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
She later repeated her rehabilitation success with cheetah and leopard
cubs. In addition to writing other books, she founded the Elsa Wild Ani-
mal Appeal (1961), an international conservation fund. She was killed by
a disgruntled employee.
Adamson, Robert See HILL, David Octavius, and Robert Adamson
Adana
New Guinea in 1946. When Papua New Guinea attained independence in
1975, the islands became part of that country.
admiralty law See MARITIME LAW
adobe
Adler, Larry orig. Lawrence Cecil Adler (b. Feb. 10, 1914, Bal-
Admiralty, High Court of See HIGH COURT OF ADMIRALTY
adrenaline See EPINEPHRINE
Adrian
include direct mail (see DIRECT-MAIL MARKETING), billboards and posters, tran-
sit advertising, the Internet, and promotional items such as matchbooks or
calendars. Advertisers attempt to choose media that are favoured by the
advertisers’ target audience. See also MARKETING; MERCHANDISING.
Aeroflot
Aethelberht I See ETHELBERT I
Aethelred Unraed See ETHELRED II
Aetolia
AFL-CIO in full American Federation of Labor-Congress of
See also LANE KIRKLAND; KNIGHTS OF LABOR; WALTER REUTHER.
!Aflaq
African Methodist Episcopal Church (AME Church) African
African National Congress (ANC) South African political party
Africa. See also INKATHA FREEDOM PARTY; ALBERT LUTULI; PAN-AFRICAN MOVEMENT.
WITCHCRAFT AND SORCER Y.
Afrikaans
begun a scramble to partition the continent, and by 1920 much of it was
under colonial rule. Anticolonial sentiment developed gradually, becom-
ing widespread after 1950, and one by one the colonies became indepen-
dent, the last in 1990. Political instability, refugee problems, famine, and
AIDS are the chief problems facing the continent at the start of the 21st
century. See map on following page.
Africa Proconsular Roman province. It was founded after Rome defeated
CARTHAGE in 146 BC and was subsequently extended to include NUMIDIA and
the northern part of modern Libya. Between 30 BC and AD 180, other parts
of northern Africa, including CYRENAICA and Mauretania, became part of
the ROMAN REPUBLIC AND EMPIRE. In the 5th century the region was taken by
the VANDALS, though areas were later reconquered by the BYZANTINE (Eastern
Roman) Empire; the Muslims conquered the area in the late 7th century.
Africa, Horn of See HORN OF AFRICA
African ant bear See AARDVARK
BULI STYLE; DÉBLÉ; SEGONI-KUN; TELUM FIGURE; TRICKSTER TALE; and African authors
by name, such as CHINUA ACHEBE; AIMÉ CÉSAIRE; BIRAGO DIOP; ATHOL FUGARD;
NADINE GORDIMER; WOLE SOYINKA; AMOS TUTUOLA.
African languages Languages indigenous to Africa that belong to the
NIGER-CONGO, NILO-SAHARAN, KHOISAN, and AFRO-ASIATIC language phyla.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
aftosa See FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE
Aga Khan
See also CAPE TOWN; GREAT TREK; NATIONAL PARTY.
Afro-Asiatic languages formerly Hamito-Semitic languages
Afro-Caribbean, Afro-Brazilian, and Afro-American reli-
on an 1875 trip to the western coast of South America led him to chal-
lenge CHARLES DARWIN’s theory of coral reef formation.
Agassiz, Elizabeth Cabot orig. Elizabeth Cabot Cary (b. Dec.
Agassiz
ageratum
FERTILIZERS, HERBICIDES, and INSECTICIDES. Most are mixtures of two or more
Aguán
Aemadiyyah
graphed for the company included its
signature Revelations (1960), set to
black spirituals. From the 1960s to
the 1980s,
the company toured
worldwide, and Ailey became one of
the best-known U.S. choreographers.
Ailly
Airedale terrier
SALLY ANNE THOMPSON/EB INC.
airbrush (cid:2) airship
and landing. See also AIRFOIL; AVIATION; GLIDER; HELICOPTER.
Two physical forces essential to airplane flight are thrust and lift. Jet engines, such
as the turbofan shown, provide forward thrust by taking in air through the front of
the engine, compressing it, and burning it with fuel in the combustor. Hot exhaust
gases and air are then expelled at high speed from the rear of the engine. Lift is
generated by the flow of air past the wings. Air flowing over the rounded upper
surface of a wing moves faster than air flowing past the flat lower surface; as a
result, the air above the wing exerts a lower pressure than the air below, producing
a net upward force, or lift. Both lift and drag (friction caused by the plane moving
through air) can be adjusted by the movement of ailerons, landing flaps, and tabs
on the wings’ edges. At the rear of the plane, the elevator, located on the horizon-
tal stabilizer, controls the airplane’s movement around the lateral axis. Both the
elevator and the rudder, located on the vertical stabilizer, help to control turning
movements initiated by the ailerons.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
!0#ishah
Shortly after his reign began, he began to encourage the exclusive wor-
ship of the little-known deity ATON, a sun god he regarded as the source
of all blessings. Assuming the name Akhenaton (“One Useful to Aton”),
he moved his capital from Thebes to present-day TELL EL-AMARNA to escape
established religious powers and make a fresh start. A new art style that
focused on the details of actual life rather than on timeless conditions
became popular. In government, Akhenaton tried to recapture the old
authority of the ruler, which had been largely diverted to bureaucrats and
officials, but his focus on his new religion to the exclusion of affairs of
state resulted in the disintegration of Egypt’s Asian empire. He was suc-
ceeded by two of his sons-in-law, Smenkhkare and TUTANKHAMEN, but after
Tutankhamen’s early death the army took over
the throne, and
Akhenaton’s new religion was abandoned.
Akhmatova
Alaca Hüyük
NATIONAL PARK AND PRESERVE, ANIAKCHAK NATIONAL MONUMENT AND PRESERVE,
Alaskan king crab See KING CRAB
Alaskan malamute Sled dog developed by the Malemiut, an Eskimo
group. It is a strongly built dog with a broad head, erect ears, and a
plumelike tail carried over its back. Its thick coat is usually gray and white
or black and white, the colours frequently forming a caplike or masklike
marking on the head. It stands 23–25 in. (58–64 cm) tall and weighs 75–85
lbs (34–39 kg). Characteristically loyal and friendly, it has served on
expeditions to the Antarctic.
Alaungpaya
GUAGES, and TURKISH.
Albany
Albigensian
main maritime trade routes of the East and to build permanent fortresses
with settled populations. His conquests were inspired by the Crusading
spirit of King John II, rather than by considerations of mercantile gain.
Alcaeus
Alcuin
Aldrich
Aleutian
Alexander Nevsky
the land assemblies fell into gradual disuse, the professional bureaucracy
and regular army grew in importance, and patriarch NIKON’s reforms of
the Russian Orthodox church were adopted. Though reportedly warm-
hearted and popular, Alexis was a weak ruler who sometimes entrusted
matters of state to incompetent favourites.
Alexius I Comnenus
algae
lowed, most prominently the ALMORAVID (c.
1054–1130), which extended its domain to
Spain, and the ALMOHAD (c. 1130–1269).
The BARBAR Y COAST pirates menaced Medi-
terranean trade for centuries; their raids served as a pretext for France to
enter Algeria in 1830. By 1847 France had established military control
over most of the region and by the late 19th century had instituted civil
rule. Popular protest against French rule resulted in the bloody ALGERIAN
WAR (1954–61); independence was achieved following a referendum in
1962. Beginning in the early 1990s, Islamic fundamentalist opposition to
secular rule led to an outbreak in civil violence between the army and
various Islamic extremist groups.
Algerian Reformist !Ulam)#
MU!0WIYAH.
Ali, Muhammad orig. Cassius (Marcellus) Clay (b. Jan. 17,
Aliákmon
ATOMS have only one ELECTRON in the outermost shell, they are very reac-
tive chemically (they react rapidly, even violently, with water), form
numerous compounds, and are never found free in nature.
alkaline earth metal Any of the six chemical ELEMENTS in the second
leftmost group of the PERIODIC TABLE (BER YLLIUM, MAGNESIUM, CALCIUM, STRONTIUM,
Allahabad
Allen, Steve orig. Stephen Valentine Patrick William Allen
Allen, Woody orig. Allen Stewart Konigsberg (b. Dec. 1, 1935,
Allenby (of Megiddo and of Felixstowe), Edmund Henry
Allende
Allingham
Almendros
Alsatian See GERMAN SHEPHERD
Altai Mountains Russian Altay
Altgeld, John Peter (b. Dec. 30, 1847, Niederselters, Prussia—d.
March 12, 1902, Joliet, Ill., U.S.) German-born U.S. politician, governor
of Illinois (1893–97). He emigrated from Germany as a child. In the 1870s
he moved to Chicago, where he accumulated a small fortune in real estate
and became active in Democratic Party politics. In 1892 he won the gov-
ernorship as a reformist candidate. In 1893, at the urging of CLARENCE DAR-
ROW and labour leaders, he granted clemency to three men convicted of
complicity in the HAYMARKET RIOT. The controversial pardon provoked an
outcry from conservatives and contributed to his defeat for reelection in
1896, though Altgeld’s decision later gained wide approval in judicial
circles.
altimeter
He was governor of Guatemala in 1527–31. In 1539 he began an explo-
ration of central Mexico, but died while quelling an Indian uprising.
Alvarez
amaranth
Ambon
58 I American Association (cid:2) American Indian Movement
try (see ABOLITIONISM). Cofounded in 1833 by WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON and
ARTHUR TAPPAN, it promoted the formation of state and local auxiliaries to
agitate for abolition. Despite violent opposition, by 1840 the group had
2,000 auxiliaries and more than 150,000 members, including THEODORE
WELD and WENDELL PHILLIPS. Its most effective public meetings featured tes-
timony by former slaves, including FREDERICK DOUGLASS and WILLIAM WELLS
BROWN. In 1839 it split into two factions: a radical group led by Garrison
that denounced the Constitution as supportive of slavery and a moderate
faction led by Tappan that led to the birth of the LIBERTY PARTY.
American Association of Retired Persons See AARP
American Ballet Theatre Prominent ballet company based in New
York City. It was founded in 1939 as the Ballet Theatre (the name was
changed in 1958) by Lucia Chase and Richard Pleasant to promote works
“American in character.” Oliver Smith replaced Pleasant as codirector in
1945; MIKHAIL BAR YSHNIKOV served as artistic director from 1980 to 1989
after dancing with the company in the 1970s. New ballets were created
for the company by AGNES DE MILLE, JEROME ROBBINS, TWYLA THARP, and ANT-
ONY TUDOR; MICHEL FOKINE revived many of his earlier works for them as
well. Principal dancers have included ALICIA ALONSO, ERIK BRUHN, ANTON
DOLIN, and NATALIA MAKAROVA.
American Bar Association (ABA) Voluntary association (founded
1878) of U.S. lawyers, judges, and other legal professionals. The largest
bar association in the U.S., it seeks to improve the legal profession, ensure
the availability of legal services to all citizens, and improve the admin-
istration of justice. It conducts educational and research projects, spon-
sors professional meetings, and publishes a monthly journal. At the
beginning of the 21st century its membership exceeded 400,000.
American Broadcasting Co. See ABC
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) Organization founded by
American Civil War or Civil War or War Between the States
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
American Federation of Labor–Congress of Industrial
Organizations See AFL–CIO
American Indian or Native American or Amerindian Any
member of the various aboriginal peoples of the Western Hemisphere,
with the exception of the ESKIMOs (Inuit) and the ALEUTs. Though the term
Native American is today often preferred over American Indian, particu-
larly in the U.S., many Native American peoples continue to prefer Ameri-
can Indian (or Indian). In Canada the name First Nation is preferred. The
ancestors of the American Indians were nomadic hunters of northeast Asia
who migrated over the Bering Strait land bridge into North America prob-
ably during the last glacial period (20,000–30,000 years ago). By c.
10,000 BC they had occupied much of North, Central, and South America.
See also ANASAZI CULTURE; ANDEAN CIVILIZATION; CLOVIS COMPLEX; EASTERN
WOODLANDS INDIAN; FOLSOM COMPLEX; HOHOKAM CULTURE; HOPEWELL CULTURE;
MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION; MISSISSIPPIAN CULTURE; MOGOLLON CULTURE; NORTH-
WEST COAST INDIAN; PLAINS INDIAN; PUEBLO INDIAN; SOUTHEASTERN INDIAN; SOUTH-
WEST INDIAN; WOODLAND CULTURE.
QUOIAN, SIOUAN, MUSKOGEAN, ATHABASKAN, UTO-AZTECAN, SALISHAN) account
for many of the languages of eastern and interior North America, though
the far west was an area of extreme diversity (see HOKAN; PENUTIAN). It is
estimated that in Mexico and northern Central America (Mesoamerica),
an estimated 15–20 million people spoke more than 300 languages before
Columbus. The large OTOMANGUEAN and MAYA families and a single lan-
guage, NAHUATL, shared Mesoamerica with many smaller families and lan-
guage isolates. More than 10 of these languages and language complexes
still have more than 100,000 speakers. South America and the West Indies
had an estimated pre-Columbian population of 10–20 million, speaking
more than 500 languages. Important language families include Chibchan
in Colombia and southern Central America, QUECHUAN and Aymaran in
the Andean region, and ARAWAKAN, CARIBAN, and TUPIAN in northern and
central lowland South America. Aside from Quechuan and Aymaran, with
about 10 million speakers, and the TUPIAN language Guaraní, most remain-
ing South American Indian languages have very few speakers, and some
face certain extinction.
American Indian Movement (AIM) Civil rights organization
founded in 1968, originally to help urban AMERICAN INDIANs displaced by
government programs. It later broadened its efforts to include demands
for economic independence, autonomy over tribal areas, restoration of
illegally seized lands, and protection of Indian legal rights and traditional
culture. Some of its protest activities involved violence and were highly
publicized (see WOUNDED KNEE). Internal strife and the imprisonment of
some leaders led to the disbanding of its national leadership in 1978,
though local groups have continued to function.
American Indian religions, North Religious beliefs and practices
DANCE tradition and the NATIVE AMERICAN CHURCH. See also MESOAMERICAN
RELIGIONS.
American Indian religions, South Religious beliefs and practices
MESOAMERICAN RELIGIONS.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
American Indian religions (cid:2) American Revolution
American Legion Organization of U.S. war veterans. Founded in
1919, it works for the care of disabled and sick veterans and promotes
compensation and pensions for the disabled, widows, and orphans. Non-
political and nonsectarian, its membership requirement is honourable ser-
vice and an honourable discharge. It was instrumental in establishing
veterans’ hospitals, and it sponsored the creation of the U.S. Veterans
Administration in 1930. In 1944 it played an important role in the pas-
sage of the GI BILL. The American Legion claims about three million mem-
bers in some 15,000 local posts, or groups.
American Medical Association (AMA) Organization of U.S. phy-
sicians. It was founded in 1847 “to promote the science and art of medi-
cine and the betterment of public health.” It has about 250,000 members,
about half of all practicing U.S. physicians. It disseminates information
to its members and the public, operates as a lobbying group, and helps
set medical education standards. Its publications include Journal of the
American Medical Association, American Medical News, and journals on
medical specialties.
American Motors Corp. (AMC) Former U.S. automobile manufac-
turer. AMC was formed in 1954 from the merger of two pioneering auto
manufacturers, Nash-Kelvinator Corp. (successor to Nash Motor Co.,
founded 1916) and Hudson Motor Car Co. (founded 1909). AMC pro-
duced AMC compact cars, AM General trucks and buses, and, until 1968,
Kelvinator appliances. Jeeps joined the product line after AMC purchased
the Kaiser-Jeep Corp. (dating to 1903) in 1970. AMC became a subsid-
iary of CHR YSLER CORP. in 1987, which in turn merged with Daimler-Benz
in 1998 to form DAIMLERCHR YSLER AG.
American Museum of Natural History Major centre of research
American Party See KNOW-NOTHING PARTY
American Protective Association (APA) Secret anti-Catholic,
anti-immigrant society formed in Iowa in 1887. Its membership, consist-
ing mainly of farmers who feared the growth and political power of
immigrant-populated cities, rose to more than two million in the 1890s.
Membership dwindled after the election of 1896 and the return of agri-
cultural prosperity in the Midwest. By 1911 the society had disappeared.
American Renaissance or New England Renaissance Period
American Revolution or United States War of Indepen-
CR YSTAL PALACE exhibition (1851) did British engineers, viewing exhibits of
machines used in the U.S. to produce INTERCHANGEABLE PARTS, begin to apply
the system. Within 25 years, the American System was being widely used
in making a host of industrial products. See also ASSEMBLY LINE; FACTOR Y.
American Telephone and Telegraph Co. See AT&T
americium
American Saddlebred or American Saddle Horse Breed of
American Stock Exchange (AMEX) Stock exchange in the U.S.
Originally known as “the Curb,” it began as an outdoor marketplace in
New York City c. 1850. It moved indoors to its present location in the
Wall Street area in 1921. Once a marketplace for SECURITIES not reputable
enough for the NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE, it became equally respectable,
with its own listing admissions requirements. In 1998 it merged with the
National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD), then-owner of the
NASDAQ exchange, to form the Nasdaq-Amex Market Group. After
NASD sold its interest in the NASDAQ in 2000, AMEX remained a
NASD subsidiary.
American System of manufacture Production of many identical
Ethiopia’s population. Their language is Amharic, a Semitic language of
the AFRO-ASIATIC family, and their religion is ETHIOPIAN ORTHODOX. The
Amhara, who have dominated the history of their country, descend from
ancient Semitic conquerors who mingled with indigenous Cushitic
peoples. They are agriculturalists and place great value on land owner-
ship.
Amharic
Amish
formed in the 1930s, amniocentesis is generally done under local
anesthesia in the 15th–17th week of gestation.
amoeba
after the stone blocks arranged themselves into walls at the sound of
Amphion’s lyre. Amphion became king of Thebes, and he married NIOBE,
with whom he had six sons and six daughters. When their children were
killed by the gods, he committed suicide.
amphioxus
ZEOLITES.
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
anamorphosis
FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS. See also NUMERICAL ANALYSIS.
the DISTANCE FORMULA.
2001). See also LOGICAL POSITIVISM; VIENNA CIRCLE.
Anastasia Russian Anastasiya Nikolayevna (b. June 18, 1901,
Anastasius
SCHOOLING BEHAVIOUR.
ancien régime
Anderson, (James) Maxwell
ing the AMAZON and PILCOMAYO.
andesite
its institutions are based in Catalonian law, and it is part of the diocese
of Urgel (Spain). The traditional economy was based on sheep raising,
but tourism grew in importance since the 1950s and became central to
Andorra’s economy by the early 21st century.
Andorra la Vella
two—The Bridge on the Drina (1945) and Bosnian Story (1945)—are
about the history of Bosnia. He was awarded the Nobel Prize for Litera-
ture in 1961.
androgen
ing; aortic aneurysm rupture causes severe pain and immediate collapse.
Rupture of an aneurysm in the brain is a major cause of STROKES. Treat-
ment can consist of simply tying off a small vessel; more serious aneu-
rysms require surgery to replace the diseased section of artery with a
plastic graft.
Angara
built c. 1200 by King JAYAVARMAN VII. During the period of great construc-
tion that lasted more than 300 years, there were many changes in archi-
tecture as the religious focus changed from Hindu to Buddhist cults. After
the Siamese conquest of the Khmer in the 15th century, the ruined city
and its temples were buried in the jungle. When the French colonial
regime was established in 1863, the entire site became the focus of schol-
arly interest. During Cambodia’s political upheavals of the late 20th cen-
tury there was some war damage, but the major problem was one of
neglect. Angkor was added to the WORLD HERITAGE SITE list in 1992.
Angkor Wat
Angoulême
Anhui or An-hui conventional Anhwei
anion
been used by the indigenous inhabitants). It became independent in the
15th century AD, opening the way for steady Vietnamese movement
toward the MEKONG RIVER delta. When Vietnam was united in 1802, the
city of HUE became the capital, and the area was ruled by the emperor of
Annam. Central Vietnam gradually came under French control in the 19th
century; it became a protectorate in 1883–85, leaving the court at Hue
with only nominal power. The area was partitioned between North and
South Vietnam in 1954; Annam’s last emperor had abdicated in 1945 but
served as Vietnam’s chief of state from 1949 until shortly after partition.
Annan
anomie
Anshan
anteater Any of four species of toothless, insect-eating placental mam-
mals. Found in tropical savannas and forests from Mexico to northern
Argentina and Uruguay, anteaters have a long tail, dense fur, a long skull,
and a tubular muzzle. Their mouth opening is small, and the tongue is
long and wormlike. They live alone or in pairs and feed mainly on ants
and termites, which they obtain byinserting their st icky tongue into a nest
torn open by the long, sharp, curved claws of their forefeet. The species
range in length from 15 in. (37 cm) to 6 ft (1.8 m). Once grouped together,
anteaters are now considered as separate from ECHIDNAS and PANGOLINS.
Antelami
domestic heating, but today they have given way to other sources of
energy (e.g., natural gas and electricity).
anthracnose
antiballistic missile (ABM) Weapon designed to intercept and
destroy ballistic MISSILEs. Effective ABM systems have been sought since
the Cold War, when the nuclear arms race raised the spectre of complete
destruction by unstoppable ballistic missiles. In the late 1960s both the
U.S. and the Soviet Union developed nuclear-armed ABM systems that
combined a high-altitude interceptor missile (the U.S. Spartan and Soviet
Galosh) with a terminal-phase interceptor (the U.S. Sprint and Soviet
Gazelle). Both sides were limited by the 1972 Treaty on Antiballistic
Missile Systems to one ABM location each; the U.S. dismantled its sys-
tem, while the Soviet Union deployed one around Moscow. During the
1980s the U.S. began research on an ambitious STRATEGIC DEFENSE INITIATIVE
against an all-out Soviet attack, but this effort proved expensive and tech-
nically difficult, and it lost urgency with the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Attention shifted to “theatre” systems such as the U.S. Patriot missile,
which was used with limited effect against conventionally armed Iraqi
Scud missiles during the Persian Gulf War (1990–91). In 2002 the U.S.
formally withdrew from the ABM treaty in order to develop a defense
against limited missile attack by smaller powers or “rogue” states.
Antibes
Antigonus I Monophthalmus
18th-century writer LAURENCE STERNE. Writers of such works include NATH-
ALIE SARRAUTE, CLAUDE SIMON, ALAIN ROBBE-GRILLET, Uwe Johnson, and Rayner
Heppenstall.
Antioch
combination…or conspiracy in restraint of trade or commerce.” The Clay-
ton Antitrust Act of 1914, as amended in 1936 by the Robinson-Patman
Act, prohibits discrimination among customers through prices or other
means; it also prohibits mergers or acquisitions whenever the effect may
be “to substantially lessen competition.” Labour unions are also subject
to antitrust laws.
antlion Insect (family Myrmeleontidae) known in its larval stage for its
aggressive capture of prey. The ant-
lion LARVA digs a funnel-shaped
sandy pit by using its oval, bristled
abdomen, then buries itself in the pit
with only its powerful jaws uncov-
ered. Any small insect that ventures
over the pit’s edge slips to the bot-
tom and is seized by the antlion,
which sucks the contents of its vic-
tim and throws out the empty skin.
The adult antlion does not feed. The
best known of the 65 described spe-
cies occurs in North America and Europe.
Antofagasta
antyesti
Apamea Cibotus
with subjects for which principles and methodology developed relatively
late, including art, agriculture, medicine, jurisprudence, and politics, but
in the modern era they have usually been vehicles of wit and pithy wis-
dom. Celebrated modern aphorists include FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE and OSCAR
WILDE.
aphrodisiac
Apollo asteroid See EARTH-CROSSING ASTEROID
Apollo Theatre During and after the HARLEM RENAISSANCE, a centre of
African-American popular music on 125th Street in New York City’s
Harlem district. Built in 1914, it hosted musical performers such as BILL
ROBINSON, BILLIE HOLIDAY, BESSIE SMITH, ETHEL WATERS, DUKE ELLINGTON, and oth-
ers in the 1930s and ’40s; stars such as ELLA FITZGERALD, SARAH VAUGHAN,
and JAMES BROWN were discovered on Wednesday amateur nights. In the
1960s the Apollo featured soul artists such as the SUPREMES, STEVIE WON-
DER, and MARVIN GAYE. Converted into a movie theatre in 1975, it was
reopened as a performance venue in 1983.
Apollonius Dyscolos
Appalachian Mountains Mountain system, eastern North America.
The Appalachians, among the oldest mountains on Earth, extend almost
2,000 mi (3,200 km) from the Canadian province of Newfoundland and
Labrador in the northeast southwestward to Alabama in the U.S. They
include the WHITE MOUNTAINS in New Hampshire, the GREEN MOUNTAINS in
Vermont, the CATSKILL MOUNTAINS in New York, the ALLEGHENY MOUNTAINS
primarily in Pennsylvania, the BLUE RIDGE Mountains in Virginia and North
Carolina, the GREAT SMOKY MOUNTAINS in North Carolina and Tennessee,
and the CUMBERLAND PLATEAU extending from West Virginia to Alabama.
Their highest peak is Mount MITCHELL in North Carolina. See also APPA-
LACHIAN GEOSYNCLINE; APPALACHIAN NATIONAL SCENIC TRAIL.
Appalachian National Scenic Trail Footpath, APPALACHIAN MOUN-
Appalachian orogenic
PSYCHOLOGY, and community psychology. See also INDUSTRIAL-ORGANIZATIONAL
PSYCHOLOGY; PSYCHOMETRICS.
appliqué See QUILTING
Appomattox
PICASSO, GEORGES ROUAULT, and ANDRÉ MASSON.
aquavit
try until 2000. See also Y0SIR !ARAF0T; h0FI- AL-ASSAD; MENACHEM BEGIN;
DAVID BEN-GURION; CAMP DAVID ACCORDS; MOSHE DAYAN; HEZBOLLAH; GAMAL
ABDEL NASSER; YITZHAK RABIN; SABRA AND SHATILA MASSACRES; ANWAR EL-S0D0T.
Arab League or League of Arab States Regional organization
Arabia See ARABIAN PENINSULA
Arabian Desert Desert region,
RAY MANLEY—SHOSTAL ASSOC./EB INC.
Arabesque decoration on the dome of
the Madar-i-Sh)h madrasah (“school”)
built by husayn I, early 18th century, at
EÆfah)n, Iran
ARABIAN PENINSULA. It covers about
900,000 sq mi (2,330,000 sq km),
occupying nearly the entire penin-
sula. It lies largely within SAUDI ARA-
BIA but
large portions extend into
Jordan,
Iraq, Kuwait, Qatar,
United Arab Emirates, Oman, and
Yemen. Its relief is broken by a num-
ber of mountain ranges, with eleva-
tions reaching as high as 12,000 ft (3,700 m), and it is bounded on three
sides by high escarpments. At least one-third of the desert is covered by
sand, including the RUB! AL-KHALI, considered to have one of the most
inhospitable climates on Earth. There are no perennial bodies of water,
though the TIGRIS-EUPHRATES river system lies to the northeast and the Wadi
hajr is located to the south, in Yemen. Humans have inhabited the area
since Pleistocene times.
Arabian horse Earliest improved breed of HORSE, valued for its speed,
stamina, beauty, intelligence, and gentleness. Its long history has been
obscured by legend, but it was developed in Arabia by the 7th century AD.
It has contributed its qualities to most modern breeds of light horses. It
is compact and relatively small, with a small head, protruding eyes, wide
nostrils, marked withers, and a short back. Its average height is about 15
hands (60 in. [152 cm]), its average weight 800–1,000 lbs (360–450 kg).
Though many colours are possible, gray is the most common.
Arabian Nights’ Entertainment See The THOUSAND AND ONE NIGHTS
Arabian Peninsula or Arabia Peninsular region, southwest Asia.
With its offshore islands, it covers about 1 million sq mi (2.6 million sq
km). Constituent countries are Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, United
Arab Emirates, Yemen, and, the largest, Saudi Arabia. It is generally arid
and is covered almost entirely by the ARABIAN DESERT. The modern economy
is dominated by the production of petroleum and natural gas. The world’s
largest proven reserves of those minerals are in the Arabian Peninsula. Its
political consolidation was begun by the Prophet MUHAMMAD, and it was
the centre of the orthodox caliphate until 661, when that office passed to
the UMAYYAD DYNASTY in DAMASCUS. After 1517 much of the region was
dominated by the OTTOMAN EMPIRE, though the peninsula’s people, who had
remained largely tribal and nomadic, revolted repeatedly until the World
War I (1914–18), when the Ottoman Empire dissolved. Thereafter, indi-
vidual nation-states followed their own histories, though many maintained
close ties with European powers such as the United Kingdom.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Arab League (cid:2) Arabic philosophy
some TURKIC languages, MALAY, SWAHILI, and HAUSA. The MALTESE LANGUAGE
Arabic philosophy or Islamic philosophy Doctrines of the Ara-
Spaniard AVERROËS, whose interpretations of ARISTOTLE were taken up by
both Jewish and Christian thinkers. Muslims, Christians, and Jews par-
ticipated in the Arabic tradition and separated themselves according to
philosophic rather than religious doctrines. When the Arabs dominated
Spain, the Arabic philosophic literature was translated into Hebrew and
Latin; this contributed to the development of modern European philoso-
phy. In Egypt around the same time, the Arabic tradition was developed
by MOSES MAIMONIDES and IBN KHALDUN.
Arachne
an alphabet of Phoenician origin found in the northern Levant dating from
c. 850 to 600 BC. The period 600–200 BC saw a dramatic expansion of
Aramaic, leading to the development of a standard form known as Impe-
rial Aramaic. In later centuries, as “Standard Literary Aramaic,” it became
a linguistic model. Late (or Classical) Aramaic (c. AD 200–1200) has an
abundant literature, both in Syriac and in Mandaic (see MANDAEANISM).
With the rise of Islam, Arabic rapidly supplanted Aramaic as a vernacu-
lar in South Asia. Modern Aramaic (Neo-Aramaic) comprises West Neo-
Aramaic, spoken in three villages northeast of Damascus, Syria, and East
Neo-Aramaic, a group of languages spoken in scattered settlements of
Jews and Christians in southeastern Turkey, northern Iraq, and northwest-
ern Iran, and by modern Mandaeans in the SHA’’ AL-!ARAB. Since c. 1900
persecution has forced most contemporary East Neo-Aramaic-speakers,
who number several hundred thousand, into diaspora communities around
the world.
Aramco
arboretum
archaebacteria
archetype
of the area within which, for one day or more each year, the sun does not
set or rise. The length of continuous day or night increases northward from
the Arctic Circle, mounting to six months at the NORTH POLE.
Arctic fox Northern FOX (Alopex lagopus) found throughout the Arctic,
usually on tundra or mountains near the sea. Its short, rounded ears and
short muzzle reduce its body area exposed to heat loss, and it has fur-
covered soles. It is 20–24 in. (50–60 cm) long (excluding the 12-in., or
30-cm, tail) and weighs 7–17 lbs (3–8 kg). It has two colour phases. Indi-
viduals in the white phase are grayish brown in summer and white in win-
ter; those in the blue phase (blue foxes of the fur trade) are grayish in
summer and gray-blue in winter. The Arctic fox dwells in burrows and
feeds on any available animal or vegetable material.
Arctic National Park, Gates of the See GATES OF THE ARCTIC
NATIONAL PARK
Arctic Ocean Ocean centring approximately on the NORTH POLE. Small-
est of the world’s oceans, it is almost completely surrounded by the land-
masses of Eurasia and North America, and it is distinguished by a cover
of ice. Lands in it and adjacent to it include Point Barrow in Alaska, the
ARCTIC ARCHIPELAGO, GREENLAND, SVALBARD, FRANZ JOSEF LAND, and northern
explorers included ROALD AMUNDSEN, FRIDTJOF NANSEN, ROBERT E. PEAR Y, and
RICHARD E. BYRD. Development of the area’s natural resources was spurred
by the discovery of oil in Alaska in the 1960s. Virtually all of the Arctic
has now been mapped. See map opposite.
Arctic tern TERN species (Sterna paradisaea) that makes the longest
annual migration of any bird. It breeds in the southerly reaches of the
Arctic and winters in the Antarctic, making its migration a round-trip of
nearly 22,000 mi (over 35,000 km). Its appearance—white with a black
cap and grayish wings—is similar to that of the common tern (S. hirundo),
its frequent companion.
Ardea
traced TOTALITARIANISM to 19th-century ANTI-SEMITISM, IMPERIALISM, and the dis-
integration of the traditional nation-state. Her highly controversial book
Eichmann in Jerusalem (1963) argued that the Nazi war criminal ADOLF
EICHMANN was not inwardly wicked or depraved but merely “thoughtless”;
his role in the extermination of the Jews thus epitomized the fearsome
“banality of evil” that had swept across Europe at the time. Resuming
contact with Heidegger in 1950, she claimed that his involvement with
the Nazis had been the “mistake” of a great philosopher. She taught at the
University of Chicago (1963–67) and thereafter at the New School for
Social Research in New York City.
Areopagus
Argerich
Arjan
Armageddon
Armenia, Little See LITTLE ARMENIA
AND EMPIRE and later from the BYZANTINE EMPIRE, the SELJãQ DYNASTY, the OTTO-
Armenian Secret Army to Liberate Armenia See ASALA
Armistice (Nov. 11, 1918) Agreement between Germany and the Allies
ending WORLD WAR I. Allied representatives met with a German delega-
tion in a railway carriage at Rethondes, France, to discuss terms. The
agreement was signed on Nov. 11, 1918, and the war ended at 11:00 AM
that day (“the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month”). The prin-
cipal term was that Germany would evacuate Belgium, France, and
Alsace-Lorraine. Negotiations formalizing the armistice were conducted
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Armenia (cid:2) Armour
at the PARIS PEACE CONFERENCE. Later a “stab in the back” legend developed
in Germany, asserting that the German military situation had not been
hopeless and that traitorous politicians had done the Allies’ bidding by
signing the Armistice.
Armory Show formally International Exhibition of Modern
Art Exhibition of painting and sculpture held in 1913 at the 69th Regi-
ment Armory in New York City. Conceived by its organizers, the Asso-
ciation of American Painters and Sculptors, as a selection of works
exclusively by U.S. artists, it evolved into a comprehensive look at cur-
rent European art movements, due in part to the advanced vision of asso-
ciation president Arthur B. Davies. Of the 1,300 works assembled, one-
third were European, tracing the evolution of modern art from FRANCISCO
DE GOYA to MARCEL DUCHAMP and VASILY KANDINSKY, with works representa-
tive of IMPRESSIONISM, SYMBOLISM, POST-IMPRESSIONISM, FAUVISM, and CUBISM.
Suit of 15th-century European plate armour.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
106 I armoured vehicle (cid:2) Arne
HAGUE CONVENTION (1899). The WASHINGTON CONFERENCE (1921–22) and the
KELLOGG-BRIAND PACT (1928) were broken without much fear of sanction.
U.S.-Soviet treaties to control nuclear weapons during the COLD WAR were
taken more seriously. In 1968 the two superpowers and Britain sponsored
the NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY (signed also by 59 other countries),
which committed signatory countries not to promote the spread, or pro-
liferation, of nuclear weapons to countries that did not already possess
them. See also NUCLEAR TEST-BAN TREATY; STRATEGIC ARMS LIMITATION TALKS; STRA-
TEGIC ARMS REDUCTION TALKS.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Orleans, he participated in marching,
riverboat, and cabaret bands. A child-
hood nickname, Satchelmouth, was
shortened to Satchmo and used
throughout his life. In 1922 he moved
to Chicago to join KING OLIVER’s Cre-
ole Jazz Band (see DIXIELAND). In 1924
he joined the FLETCHER HENDERSON
AP/WIDE WORLD PHOTOS
Louis Armstrong.
Neil Armstrong, 1969.
also AIR FORCE, CONSCRIPTION, GUERRILLA, MILITAR Y UNIT, MILITIA, U.S. ARMY.
Arnhem
to a class of HYDROCARBONs isolated from coal tar and distinguished by
odours much stronger than those of other classes of hydrocarbons. In
modern chemistry, aromaticity denotes the chemical behaviour, especially
the low reactivity, of this class of molecules related to their bonding. The
parent compound of this class is BENZENE (C6H6). See also HYDROGENATION.
arsenic poisoning Harmful
effects of ARSENIC compounds (in pesticides, chemotherapy drugs, paints,
etc.), most often from INSECTICIDE exposure. Susceptibility varies. Arsenic
is believed to combine with certain enzymes, interfering with cellular
metabolism. Symptoms of acute arsenic poisoning include nausea and
abdominal pain followed by circulatory collapse. Acute exposure to the
gas arsine causes destruction of red blood cells and kidney damage;
chronic exposure causes weakness, skin disorders, anemia, and nervous-
system disorders. Arsenic in urine and hair or nails is the key to diagno-
sis. Treatment
involves washing out
the stomach and promptly
administering the antidote dimercaprol.
Arsinoe
Art Nouveau
arthritis
with the rail line passing through the Otira Tunnel (5.3 mi [8.6 km]).
Arthur’s Pass National Park was created in 1929.
Artibonite River
arugula
greatly exacerbates its symptoms. LUNG CANCER and malignant mesothe-
lioma are more common with asbestos inhalation and asbestosis.
Ascalon See ASHQELON
Ascanius
accused by the Mu!tazilah of believing in predestination because they
claimed the human capacity for action was only acquired at the very
moment of action.
Ashbery, John (Lawrence) (b. July 28, 1927, Rochester, N.Y., U.S.)
U.S. poet. He earned degrees from Harvard and Columbia universities
and subsequently became known as an art critic. His poems, noted for
their elegance, originality, and obscurity, are characterized by arresting
images, exquisite rhythms, intricate form, and sudden shifts in tone and
subject. His collections include The Double Dream of Spring (1970),
Self-Portrait in a Convex Mirror (1975, Pulitzer Prize, National Book
Award), A Wave (1984), Flow Chart (1991), and Wakefulness (1998).
Ashcroft, Dame Peggy orig. Edith Margaret Emily Ashcroft
Ashgabat
Ashurbanipal
aspartame
assaying
were placed on reservations. Some
3,900 people claimed sole Assini-
boin descent in the 2000 U.S. census.
There
somewhat
fewer
Canada.
Assiniboine
and Elath. Astarte shared many qualities, and perhaps a common origin,
with her sister ANATH. The goddess of love and war, Astarte was worshiped
in Egypt and in Canaan, as well as among the Hittites. Her Akkadian
counterpart was ISHTAR. She is often mentioned in the Bible under the name
Ashtaroth; SOLOMON is said to have worshipped the goddess, and JOSIAH
destroyed the shrines dedicated to her. In Egypt she was assimilated with
ISIS and HATHOR; in the Greco-Roman world she was assimilated with APH-
RODITE, ARTEMIS, and JUNO.
OID; TROJAN ASTEROIDS.
asthenosphere
GAMMA-RAY ASTRONOMY; INFRARED ASTRONOMY; RADIO AND RADAR ASTRONOMY;
ULTRAVIOLET ASTRONOMY; X-RAY ASTRONOMY.
astrophysics Branch of ASTRONOMY concerned mainly with the proper-
ties and structures of cosmic objects, including the universe as a whole.
Starting in the 19th century, SPECTROSCOPY and photography were applied
to astronomical research, making it possible to study the brightness, tem-
perature, and chemical composition of cosmic objects. It was soon real-
ized that the properties of these bodies could be fully understood only in
terms of the physics of their atmospheres and interiors. X-RAY ASTRONOMY,
GAMMA-RAY ASTRONOMY, INFRARED ASTRONOMY, ULTRAVIOLET ASTRONOMY, and RADIO
AND RADAR ASTRONOMY are all basically concerned with extending electro-
magnetic coverage beyond the visible spectrum to constrain the physical
characteristics of astronomical objects.
Astruc
Atacama
Athabaskan languages or Athapaskan languages Family
Athanasius
there were 40 monasteries. Long regarded as the holy mountain of the
GREEK ORTHODOX CHURCH, it was declared a theocratic republic in 1927. Its
churches and libraries house a rich collection of Byzantine art and ancient
and medieval manuscripts.
Athyr See HATHOR
Atitlán
Atlas, Charles orig. Angelo Siciliano (b. Oct. 30, 1893, Acri,
atman
Aton or Aten
also HYDROGEN BOMB; NUCLEAR NON-
PROLIFERATION TREATY; NUCLEAR WEAPON.
atomic number Number of a
QUANTUM MECHANICS and QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS. The primary tools for the
sonal atonement (see CONFESSION). In Judaism the annual Day of Atone-
ment, YOM KIPPUR, is the culmination of 10 days centered on repentance.
Atonement, Day of See YOM KIPPUR
ATP in full adenosine triphosphate
Attica Greek Attiki
augite
IGOR STRAVINSKY.
Audubon, John James orig. Fougère Rabin or Jean Rabin
later Jean-Jacques Fougère Audubon (b. April 26, 1785, Les
Augustine
Aurelian
Australian Aboriginal languages Group of perhaps as many as
500 languages spoken by the 300,000 to 1,000,000 native inhabitants of
Australia before the beginning of European conquest in 1788. More than
half are now extinct; of the remainder, only about 20, mostly in the North
Territory and northern Western Australia, remain in active use by both
adults and children. Most Australian languages belong to a single super-
family, Pama-Nyungan, and the remainder, a very diverse group of lan-
guages spoken in the Kimberley region of Western Australia and parts of
the North Territory, may be remotely akin to Pama-Nyungan.
Australian Aborigine
Austerlitz, Battle of (Dec. 2, 1805) First engagement of the War of
the Third Coalition and one of NAPOLEON’s greatest victories. In the battle,
fought near Austerlitz in Moravia (now Slavkov u Brna, Czech Rep.),
Napoleon’s 68,000 troops defeated almost 90,000 Russians and Austrians
under Russia’s ALEXANDER I and MIKHAIL KUTUZOV. Also called the Battle of
the Three Emperors, Napoleon’s resounding victory forced Austria’s
FRANCIS I to conclude the Treaty of Pressburg, ceding Venetia to the French
kingdom in Italy and temporarily ending the anti-French alliance. See also
NAPOLEONIC WARS.
Australian National University Public university in Canberra,
Australopithecus
REMAINS;
HUMAN EVOLUTION; LAETOLI FOOTPRINTS;
LUCY; OLDUVAI GORGE; STERKFONTEIN.
Austrasia
of Italy in 1882 made it the TRIPLE ALLIANCE. The agreement remained an
important element of both German and Austro-Hungarian foreign policy
until 1918.
Austro-Hungarian Empire See AUSTRIA-HUNGAR Y
Austro-Prussian War See SEVEN WEEKS’ WAR
Austroasiatic languages Superfamily of about 150 languages spo-
ken by close to 90 million physically and culturally very diverse people
in South and Southeast Asia. Today most scholars believe that it is sub-
divided into two families, MUNDA and MON-KHMER. The present fragmented
distribution of Austroasiatic languages is most likely the result of rela-
tively
recent
incursions
AUSTRONESIAN-speaking peoples. In prehistoric times Austroasiatic lan-
guages most likely extended over a much broader and more continuous
area, including much of what is now southeastern China. Other than VIET-
NAMESE and KHMER, no Austroasiatic language is an official national lan-
guage.
INDO-AR YAN, SINO-TIBETAN,
Austronesian languages formerly Malayo-Polynesian lan-
auteur
See also AXLE, BRAKE, BUS, CARBURETOR, ELECTRIC AUTOMOBILE, FUEL INJECTION, MOTOR-
CYCLE, TRUCK.
automobile racing Sport practiced in a variety of forms on roads,
tracks, or closed circuits. It includes GRAND PRIX RACING, speedway racing
(including the INDIANAPOLIS 500), STOCK-CAR RACING, SPORTS-CAR RACING, DRAG
RACING, midget-car racing, and KARTING, as well as hill climbs and RALLY DRIV-
ING. The International Motor Sports Hall of Fame is located in Talladega,
Ala., U.S. There is no central governing body for automobile racing in
the U.S. as there is in most other countries.
autonomic
paya founded the Konbaung dynasty in the 18th century, Ava served as
its capital for a time, and even after the dynasty built Amarapura and
Mandalay, its seat was often referred to as the “Court of Ava.”
avalanche Large mass of material, such as snow or rock debris, that
moves rapidly down a mountain slope, sweeping everything in its path.
Avalanches begin when a mass of material overcomes the frictional resis-
tance of the sloping surface, often after the material’s foundation has been
weakened by rains or the snow has been partially melted by a warm, dry
wind. Other weather conditions that can lead to avalanches are heavy
snowfall and high winds. A common method of avalanche control con-
sists of detonating explosives in the upper reaches of avalanche zones,
which intentionally causes the snow to slide before accumulations have
become very great.
Avalokitesvara
to spiritual leaders; Vendidad, the main source for Zoroastrian law; the
Yashts, 21 hymns to angels and ancient heroes; and the Khurda avesta,
composed of minor texts.
Avestan
AWACS
Aying or A Ying
Turks, and Iranians. Russia acquired what
is now independent Azerbaijan in the early
19th century. After the RUSSIAN REVOLUTION
OF 1917, Azerbaijan declared its indepen-
dence; it was subdued by the Red Army in
1920 and was incorporated into the Soviet Union. It declared indepen-
dence from the collapsing Soviet Union in 1991. Azerbaijan has two geo-
graphic peculiarities. The exclave Naxçivan (Nakhichevan) is separated
from the rest of Azerbaijan by Armenian territory. NAGORNO-KARABAKH,
which lies within Azerbaijan and is administered by it, has a Christian
Armenian majority. Azerbaijan and Armenia went to war over both ter-
ritories in the 1990s, causing many deaths and great economic disruption.
Though attempts at mediation were made, the political situation remained
unresolved.
Azhar
Baader-Meinhof Gang
Babel
Bacchanalia
Babylonian Exile or Babylonian Captivity Forced detention of
Bacall, Lauren orig. Betty Joan Perske (b. Sept. 6, 1924, New
Bacharach
bacteremia
Badoglio
Baganda See GANDA
bagasse
Bahia
Bailly
Bakhtin
Cardigan swept down the valley after the retreating Russian cavalry. The
battle ended with the loss of 40% of the Light Brigade and inspired the
1855 poem “Charge of the Light Brigade” by Alfred, Lord TENNYSON.
balalaika
baldachin
Balearic
LIBERTIES UNION (ACLU). As
Baldwin (of Bewdley), Stan-
ley Baldwin, 1st Earl (b. Aug.
ish anticipated gaining a mandate over Palestine after World War I (1914–
18) and hoped to win over Jewish public opinion to the side of the Allies.
They also hoped that pro-British settlers would help protect
approaches to the SUEZ CANAL, a vital link to Britain’s South Asian pos-
sessions.
LET RUSSE DE MONTE CARLO; BALLETS RUSSES; BOLSHOI BALLET; NEW YORK CITY BAL-
LET; ROYAL BALLET.
Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo
Ballymena
rated as constituent republics. In 1944 Soviet troops recovered the terri-
tory overrun by German forces in 1941. The Baltic states gained
independence on the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991.
Baltimore, David (b. March 7, 1938, New York, N.Y., U.S.) U.S.
virologist. He received his doctorate from the Rockefeller Institute. He
and Howard Temin (1934–94), working independently, discovered an
enzyme that synthesizes DNA from RNA, the reverse of the usual pro-
cess. This enzyme, reverse transcriptase, has become an invaluable tool
in recombinant DNA technology. The research of Baltimore, Temin, and
RENATO DULBECCO helped illuminate the role of viruses in cancer; the three
men shared a Nobel Prize in 1975. In 1990 Baltimore became president
of Rockefeller University; in 1997 he became president of the California
Institute of Technology.
Baltimore (of Baltimore), George Calvert, 1st Baron (b.
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad (B&O) First steam-operated rail-
way in the U.S. to be chartered as a common carrier of freight and pas-
sengers (1827). The B&O was established by Baltimore merchants to
foster trade with the West. By 1852 the railroad extended to Wheeling,
Va. (now W.V.), and in the next two decades it reached Chicago, Ill., and
St. Louis, Mo. The B&O’s long-distance passenger trains were discon-
tinued in 1971 after AMTRAK was established. Many of B&O’s operations
were assumed by the CSX Corp. in 1980.
Baltimore Sun Daily newspaper published in Baltimore, Md., U.S. It
was begun as a four-page penny tabloid in 1837 by Arunah Shepherdson
Abell, a journeyman printer from Rhode Island. Known through much of
its history for its coverage of national and international news, the paper
was run by Abell’s family until 1910, when control passed to a group of
Baltimore businessmen,
including H. Crawford Black. Members of
Black’s family were chairmen of the board until 1984. In 1986 the Sun
was acquired by the Times Mirror Company, which in turn was acquired
by the Tribune Company in 2000. Author H.L. MENCKEN was for years
prominently associated with the Sun.
Baluba See LUBA
Baluchistan See BALOCHISTAN
Balzac
the town of Banbridge, established in 1712; it is the district seat and the
main agricultural and population centre of the region.
Banco, Nanni di See NANNI DI BANCO
ING AND GATHERING SOCIETY; SOCIOCULTURAL EVOLUTION.
Banda, Hastings (Kamuzu)
Bandama
Bandinelli, Baccio (b. Nov. 12, 1493?, Florence—d. Feb. 7, 1560,
Florence) Italian sculptor and painter active in Florence. Though trained
as a goldsmith by his father, he soon became one of the principal sculp-
tors at the MEDICI court. He often failed to complete his commissions and
was accused of jealousy and incompetence by BENVENUTO CELLINI and GIOR-
GIO VASARI. He is remembered more for accounts of his unattractive char-
acter than for the quality of his work, although surviving works prove
him to have been a more distinguished sculptor than his contemporaries
allowed. His most famous sculpture is Hercules and Cacus (1534), in the
Piazza della Signoria.
Bandung
Bangor Town (pop., 1991: 52,437), seat of NORTH DOWN district, North-
ern Ireland. It lies on the southern shore of Belfast Lough, 12 mi (19 km)
northeast of BELFAST. St. Comgall founded a monastery at Bangor c. 555,
which became a celebrated seat of learning. The town was sacked by the
Danes in the 9th century; it was partially rebuilt by St. Malachy in the
12th century. It is now a seaside resort.
Bangui
Bann)#
severely repressed all opposition. His restrictions of union activities and
constitutional liberties led to opposition by labour, the clergy, peasants,
and students. A 1978 coup d’état overthrew him, but he was democrati-
cally elected in 1997. He resigned in 2001.
Bao Dai
Baraka
barbet
Episcopal church leaders as St. Stevens, an Episcopal college for men.
The name was changed to Bard College in 1934. Between 1928 and 1944
it served as COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY’s undergraduate school. It became coedu-
cational in 1944. Its undergraduate curriculum includes courses in the
social sciences, languages and literature, arts, and natural sciences and
mathematics.
Bardeen, John (b. May 23, 1908, Madison, Wis., U.S.—d. Jan. 30,
1991, Boston, Mass.) U.S. physicist. He earned a Ph.D. in mathematical
physics from Princeton University. He worked for the U.S. Naval Ord-
nance Laboratory during World War II, after which he worked for Bell
Telephone Laboratories. His work there led to his sharing a 1956 Nobel
Prize with WILLIAM B. SHOCKLEY and WALTER H. BRATTAIN for the invention of
the TRANSISTOR. In 1972 he again shared a Nobel Prize, this time with LEON
COOPER and J. Robert Schrieffer for developing the theory of SUPERCON-
DUCTIVITY (1957); this theory (called the BCS theory, for Bardeen-Cooper-
Schrieffer) is the basis for all later theoretical work in superconductivity.
Bardeen was also the author of a theory explaining certain properties of
SEMICONDUCTORS.
Bardesanes
from naturalistic and stylized representations of human and animal forms
to mythical beings, spirals, circles, and abstract motifs.
Barker, Harley Granville- See Harley GRANVILLE-BARKER
barking deer See MUNTJAC
Barkley, Alben W(illiam) (b. Nov. 24, 1877, Graves county, Ky.,
U.S.—d. April 30, 1956, Lexington, Va.) U.S. politician. After graduat-
ing from college, he studied law and was admitted to the Kentucky bar
in 1901. He was elected as a Democrat to the U.S. House of Represen-
tatives (1913–27) and the Senate (1927–49), where he served as majority
leader (1937–47). He was a prominent spokesman for the domestic and
international policies of Pres. FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT. He served as vice
president under Pres. HARR Y S. TRUMAN (1949–53). He later returned to the
Senate (1954–56).
Barkley, Charles (Wade) (b. Feb. 20, 1963, Leeds, Ala., U.S.) U.S.
basketball player. He spent his collegiate career as a forward at Auburn
University. He played for the Philadelphia 76ers (1984–91), the Phoenix
Suns (1992–95), and the Houston Rockets (1996–99). He is known for
his bruising play on the court and for his outspokenness off it.
Barlach
Barnard’s
RIGUERESQUE.
tal genres as OPERA, ORATORIO, CANTATA, SONATA, and CONCERTO were intro-
duced and such towering composers as CLAUDIO MONTEVERDI, J.S. BACH, and
Barotse See LOZI
Barquisimeto
Barth, John orig. John Simmons Barth, Jr. (b. May 27, 1930,
Cambridge, Md., U.S.) U.S. writer. Barth grew up on Maryland’s eastern
shore, the locale of much of his writing, and from 1953 he taught prin-
cipally at Johns Hopkins University. Apart from the experimental pieces
in Lost in the Funhouse (1968), his best-known works are the novels The
Floating Opera (1956), The End of the Road (1958), The Sot-Weed Fac-
tor (1960), Giles Goat-Boy (1966), and The Tidewater Tales (1987), most
of which play with and parody traditional narrative forms, combining
philosophical depth with biting satire and boisterous, often bawdy
humour. In 2001 he published the experimental novel Coming Soon!!!: A
Narrative, which was not well received.
Barth
he published the work for which he is best known, Familiar Quotations,
based largely on a notebook he kept for his customers. It was greatly
expanded in later editions; the 17th edition appeared in 2002. He also
wrote a complete concordance to Shakespeare’s dramatic works and
poems (1894), outstanding for the number and fullness of its citations.
Bartók
also ACID-BASE THEOR Y; ALKALI; NUCLEO-
PHILE.
Basel
The Narrow Road to the Deep North (1694), a poetic prose travelogue,
is one of the loveliest works of Japanese literature.
BASIC in full Beginner’s All-purpose Symbolic Instruction
Code Computer PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE developed by JOHN G. KEMENY and
Thomas E. Kurtz (b. 1928) at Dartmouth College in the mid 1960s. One
of the simplest high-level languages, with commands similar to English,
it can be learned with relative ease even by schoolchildren and novice
programmers. Since c. 1980, BASIC has been popular for use on PERSONAL
COMPUTERS.
Basic Input/Output System See BIOS
basic rocks See ACID AND BASIC ROCKS
basidiomycete
later it followed the variable fortunes of the Kingdom of NAPLES until united
with the Kingdom of Italy in 1861. The region suffered severe damage in a
disastrous earthquake in 1980. Agriculture is an economic mainstay.
Basilides
torical region, northern Spain. Bounded by the Bay of BISCAY, it consists
of the modern provinces of Vizcaya (Biscay), Álava, and Guipúzcoa and
has an area of 2,793 sq mi (7,234 sq km); its capital is VITORIA-GASTEIZ.
The Pyrenees Mountains separate it from the BASQUE COUNTR Y OF FRANCE.
The BASQUEs who inhabit the region have long sought autonomy. A sepa-
ratist movement succeeded in regaining Basque autonomy in 1936 under
the short-lived Republican government, but autonomy was withdrawn by
FRANCISCO FRANCO in 1937. Though limited autonomy was granted in 1979,
a campaign of terrorism against the Spanish government continued. Álava
is an agricultural region, while metallurgical industry is concentrated
around BILBAO.
Basque Country French Pays Basque
Bat Mitzvah See BAR MITZVAH
Bataan Death March
The coastline is fringed with islets, and several islands stretch from its
western tip. Discovered in 1819 by Sir William Parry, it was named for
Henry Bathurst, 3rd Earl Bathurst.
bathypelagic zone
vision news, which reports about important events in the world but at the
same time makes events important by reporting about them. In The Gulf
War Did Not Take Place (1991), he contended that the mass-media por-
trayal of the 1991 war in the Persian Gulf had made that event “unreal.”
See also POSTMODERNISM.
Baugh
Bayeux
182 I BBC (cid:2) bean
BBS See BULLETIN-BOARD SYSTEM
Beach, Amy Marcy orig. Amy Marcy Cheney known as Mrs.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Beagle
SALLY ANNE THOMPSON/EB INC.
Beagle
Channel
bearing wall or load-bearing wall Wall that carries the load of
Béarn
BROWN BEAR; SUN BEAR.
Beaton, Sir Cecil (Walter Hardy) (b. Jan. 14, 1904, London,
Beatrix
Beaumont
painted decorations for the Siena town hall (1529–35) and executed
designs for the marble pavement of Siena Cathedral. He is considered the
outstanding Sienese painter of the MANNERIST style.
Beccaria
Becknell
beehive tomb or tholos
BUMBLEBEE.
ARD STRAUSS and FREDERICK DELIUS.
Beerbohm, Sir (Henry) Max(imilian) (b. Aug. 24, 1872, London,
Beethoven
behaviour therapy or behaviour modification Application of
experimentally derived principles of LEARNING to the treatment of psycho-
logical disorders and the control of behaviour. The concept, which has its
roots in the work of EDWARD L. THORNDIKE, was popularized in the U.S. by
theorists of BEHAVIOURISM, including B.F. SKINNER. Behaviour-therapy tech-
niques are based on the principle of operant CONDITIONING, in which desired
behaviours are rewarded. There is little or no concern for conscious expe-
rience or unconscious processes. Such techniques have been applied with
some success to disturbances such as ENURESIS, TICs, PHOBIAs, STUTTERING,
Béjart
COMO PUCCINI.
Belau See PALAU
Belém
Belhadj
bell curve See NORMAL DISTRIBUTION
WILLIAM B. SHOCKLEY, for inventing the TRANSISTOR; and ARNO PENZIAS and
ROBERT W. WILSON, for discovering cosmic microwave background radia-
tion. It operates today in some 20 countries.
Bell palsy See PARALYSIS
bell ringing See CHANGE RINGING
Bella, Ahmed Ben See Ahmed BEN BELLA
Bellamy
Bell, Cool Papa orig. James Thomas Bell (b. May 17, 1903,
Bell Burnell, (Susan) Jocelyn orig. Susan Jocelyn Bell (b. July
15, 1943, Belfast, N.Ire.) British astronomer. As a research assistant at the
Bellerophon
Belmopan
See also MOHAMED BOUDIAF; HOUARI BOUMEDIENNE.
Ben-Gurion
benefice
professor of canon law, he was named a cardinal in 1375. When the WEST-
ERN SCHISM began in 1378, he supported the antipope Clement VII. Elected
pope at Avignon (see AVIGNON PAPACY), he refused French pressure to abdi-
cate and was besieged in the papal palace (1398). Benedict escaped to
Provence in 1403 and won back the obedience of France. He refused to
yield when deposed by the Councils of Pisa (1409) and Constance (1417).
Benedict XIV orig. Prospero Lambertini (b. March 31, 1675,
Benedict XV orig. Giacomo Della Chiesa (b. Nov. 21, 1854, Pegli,
Kingdom of Sardinia—d. Jan. 22,
1922, Rome, Italy) Pope (1914–22).
Ordained a priest in 1878, he entered
the papal diplomatic service. He was
made archbishop of Bologna in 1907
and cardinal in 1914. Elected pope a
month after the outbreak of World
War I, he tried to follow a policy of
strict neutrality and concentrated the
church’s efforts on relief. He later
made positive efforts toward reestab-
lishing peace, though his principal
attempt in 1917 to mediate the war
was unsuccessful.
Benedict XVI orig. Joseph
Alois Ratzinger (b. April 16,
Bengali
Benois
Bennett, Michael orig. Michael Bennett Difiglia (b. April 8,
1943, Buffalo, N.Y., U.S.—d. July 2, 1987, Tucson, Ariz.) U.S. dancer,
choreographer, and stage musical director. He began dancing at age three
and left high school to tour in a production of West Side Story. His major
contribution to dance was as choreographer-director of Broadway musi-
cals such as Promises, Promises (1968), Company (1970), Follies (1971),
and Dreamgirls (1981). His most remarkable musical was A Chorus Line
(1975, Pulitzer Prize), which he conceived, directed, and choreographed.
Bennett personally received eight Tony awards during his career.
Bennett (of Mickleham and of Calgary and Hopewell),
Richard Bedford Bennett, Viscount (b. July 3, 1870, Hopewell,
N.B., Can.—d. June 27, 1947, Mickleham, Surrey, Eng.) Canadian prime
minister (1930–35). Bennett was admitted to the bar in 1893 and prac-
ticed in New Brunswick. He then moved west and served in the legisla-
tures of the Northwest Territories and Alberta and in the Canadian House
of Commons (1911). He was named director general of national service
(1916) and later minister of justice (1921). He became head of the Con-
servative Party in 1927 and, promising relief from the Great Depression,
prime minister in 1930. But he underestimated the severity of the crisis,
and his measures were ineffective. He was defeated by the Liberals under
W.L. MACKENZIE KING. In 1939 he retired to England, where he was made
a viscount in 1941.
Bennett, Tony orig. Anthony (Dominick) Benedetto (b. Aug.
Benue-Congo
Bentinck, William (Henry Cavendish), Lord (b. Sept. 14, 1774,
HART BENTON.
Benton, Thomas Hart (b. April
Beowulf
Bergerac, Savinien Cyrano de See Savinien CYRANO DE BERGERAC
Bergey
Berkeley, Busby orig. William Berkeley Enos (b. Nov. 29, 1895,
Berkeley
Berlinguer
the story of a young priest’s war against sin. Dialogues of the Carmelites
(1949), a screenplay about 16 nuns martyred during the French Revolution,
was the basis for an opera by FRANCIS POULENC (1957).
Bernard
other contributions to Rome are his
Triton Fountain and Fountain of the
Four Rivers, noted for their architec-
tural composition and detail.
Bernoulli
Berry, Jean de France, duke de (b. Nov. 30, 1340, Vincennes,
France—d. June 15, 1416, Paris) French nobleman and patron of the arts.
He was the son of King JOHN II. As duke de Berry and Auvergne, he con-
trolled at least one-third of France during the middle period of the HUN-
DRED YEARS’ WAR. Berry shared in the administration of France and worked
for peace with England and within France, acting as diplomat and media-
tor. He invested fortunes in the art treasures that became his monument—
paintings, tapestries, jewelry, and illuminated manuscripts that included
the famous Très Riches Heures du duc de Berry.
Berry
Berzelius
German politician and chancellor (1909–17). A member of the civil ser-
vice, he was appointed Prussian minister of the interior in 1905 and
became German chancellor in 1909. Before World War I, he allowed the
militarist factions to dominate the government; in 1914 he supported a
“blank check” to Austria-Hungary for measures against Serbia. In 1916
he tried to secure the mediation of the U.S. to end the war, but he also
failed to restrict submarine warfare. In 1917 he angered conservatives by
promises of electoral reforms in Prussia and was forced to resign.
Bethune
Bezos
bhiksu
Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali (b. Jan. 5, 1928, near Larkana, Sindh, India—d.
April 4, 1979, Rawalpindi, Pak.) President (1971–73) and prime minister
(1973–77) of Pakistan. Son of a prominent politician, he was educated in
India, the U.S., and Britain. He served eight years in the government of
Mohammad Ayub Khan (1907–74) then resigned to form the Pakistan
People’s Party (1967). After the overthrow of the Ayub Khan regime and
the Pakistani civil war, Bhutto became president (1971). He nationalized
several key industries and taxed landed families. He became prime min-
ister in 1973, and his government, retaining martial law, began a process
of Islamization. Bhutto’s party won elections in 1977, but the opposition
accused him of electoral fraud. Gen. ZIA-UL-HAQ seized power and had
Bhutto imprisoned and later executed. BENAZIR BHUTTO is his daughter.
Biafra
Bibliothèque Nationale de France
Biedermeier
Bihar
big tree or giant sequoia or Sierra redwood Coniferous EVER-
GREEN (Sequoiadendron giganteum; see CONIFER) found in scattered groves
on the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada range of California, U.S. The
largest of all trees in bulk, the big tree is distinguished from the coastal
REDWOOD (Sequoia sempervirens) by having uniformly scalelike, or awl-
shaped, leaves that lie close against the branches, scaleless winter buds,
and cones requiring two seasons to mature. The pyramidal tree shape,
reddish brown furrowed bark, and drooping branches are common to both
genera. The largest specimen (in total bulk) is the General Sherman tree
in SEQUOIA NATIONAL PARK—101.5 ft (31 m) in circumference at its base,
272.4 ft (83 m) tall, and weighing an estimated 6,167 tons (5,593 metric
tons). Because big-tree lumber is more brittle than redwood lumber and
thus less desirable, the big tree has been easier to preserve; though some
groves have been cut, most of the 70 remaining groves are now protected
by state or national forests or parks.
Bigfoot or Sasquatch Large, hairy, humanlike creature that report-
edly lives in isolated areas of the northwestern U.S. and western Canada.
Descriptions of Bigfoot are similar to those of the ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN
of the Himalayas. It is said to be a primate 6–15 ft (2–4.5 m)in he ight,
walking upright and either moving silently or emitting a high-pitched cry.
Supposed footprints (some are hoaxes) have measured up to 24 in. (60
cm) in length. Despite many reported sightings, there is still no solid evi-
dence that Bigfoot exists.
bighorn or mountain sheep Stocky, climbing hoofed mammal
(Ovis canadensis) of western North
America. Both sexes have horns that
in the male may curve in a spiral
more than 39 in. (1 m) long. Their
fur is usually brown with a whitish
rump patch. The related thinhorn, or
Dall’s sheep (O. dalli), of Alaska and
Canada is similar to the bighorn.
Both species are about 39 in. (1 m)
tall at the shoulder, but the bighorn
is heavier, weighing up to 300 lb
(136 kg). They live in small groups
among remote crags and cliffs of
mountainous areas and feed mainly
on grasses. Bighorn rams compete
for females by launching themselves
at each other from a few yards’ dis-
tance and clashing horns.
Bighorn Mountains Mountain range, southern Montana and northern
Wyoming, U.S. It is a range of the northern ROCKY MOUNTAINS extending
120 mi (193 km), rising abruptly 4,000–5,000 ft (1,200–1,500 m) above
Billiton
Binet
but he was largely self-taught. He entered politics in Missouri and worked
as an itinerant portrait painter before turning to the lively routines of fron-
tier life for inspiration. Bingham is known for his incisive characteriza-
tions, clear, golden light, and talent
for organizing large, dense
compositions. His best-known works include Fur Traders Descending the
Missouri (1845) and Jolly Flatboatmen (1846).
bingo Game of chance played with cards having a grid of numbered
squares corresponding to numbered balls drawn at random. When a num-
ber on the card is drawn, the players cover that number (should they have
it); the game is won by covering a certain number of squares in a row (ver-
tically, horizontally, or diagonally). Cards are purchased and proceeds are
placed into a common “pot”; winning cards are awarded a portion of the
pot. Wildly popular in the mid 20th century, bingo has in recent decades
suffered a decline in America but has increased in popularity in other parts
of the world. The earliest name for bingo—lotto—was recorded in Britain
in 1776; the game is sometimes called keno in the U.S.
Binh Dinh Vuong See LE LOI
Bío-Bío
biological warfare or germ warfare Military use of disease-
TAXONOMY, EMBR YOLOGY, GENETICS, and ECOLOGY, each of which can be further
ZOOLOGY (animals), ORNITHOLOGY (birds), ENTOMOLOGY (insects), MYCOLOGY
(fungi), MICROBIOLOGY (microorganisms), and BACTERIOLOGY (bacteria). See
also BIOCHEMISTR Y; MOLECULAR BIOLOGY.
category. See also CREATIONISM; SOCIOBIOLOGY.
bioluminescence
Bioy Casares
Biringuccio
Bischof
Annexed by Germany in 1884, it was named for OTTO VON BISMARCK. Occu-
pied by Australia in 1914, it was made a mandated territory of Australia
in 1920. The group became part of the UN Trust Territory of New Guinea
after World War II and part of Papua New Guinea when it attained inde-
pendence in 1975.
bismuth
and by two sheets of tissue called the mantle. Bivalves have no head. They
feed on PHYTOPLANKTON by pumping water across the gills and trapping food
particles that are then moved to the mouth. Bivalves are found in most
parts of the ocean from the intertidal zone to abyssal depths.
revealing the red ground. The great
Attic painters (mid 6th century BC),
most notably EXEKIAS, developed nar-
rative scene decoration and perfected
the style. It continued to be popular
until the advent of RED-FIGURE POTTER Y
(c. 530 BC).
Black Forest German Schwarz-
228 I Black Muslims (cid:2) blackbird
Black Muslims See Nation of ISLAM
black nationalism U.S. political and social movement aimed at
developing economic power and community and ethnic pride among Afri-
can Americans. It was proclaimed by MARCUS GARVEY in the early 20th
century, when many U.S. black nationalists hoped for the eventual cre-
ation of a separate black nation in Africa. In the 1960s and ’70s, ELIJAH
MUHAMMAD and MALCOLM X preached the ideal of black nationalism as an
alternative to assimilation into the predominantly white culture of the U.S.
Black Panther Party (for Self-Defense) U.S. African American
PEPPER.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Blackberry (Rubus).
DEREK FELL
TRUM. See also ABSORPTION.
blackcap Common WARBLER (Sylvia atricapilla, family Sylviidae) from
Europe and North Africa to central
Asia. It is about 6 in. (14 cm) long
and has brownish upper parts, gray
underparts and face, and a black
(male) or reddish brown (female)
crown. Common in woodland bor-
ders and rough hedges, it has a rich
song.
Blackett
Blackwell’s Island See ROOSEVELT ISLAND
Blair, Tony orig. Anthony Charles Lynton (b. May 6, 1953, Edin-
burgh, Scot.) British politician who in 1997 became the country’s young-
est prime minister since 1812. Blair was a lawyer before winning election
to the House of COMMONS in 1983. Entering the shadow cabinet of the
LABOUR PARTY in 1988 at age 35, Blair urged the party to move to the politi-
cal centre and deemphasize its traditional advocacy of state control and
public ownership of certain sectors of the economy. He assumed leader-
ship of Labour in 1994 and revamped its platform. He led the party to
victories in the 1997, 2001, and 2005 elections. His government brokered
a peace agreement between unionists and republicans in Northern Ireland,
introduced devolved assemblies in Wales and Scotland, and carried out
reforms of Parliament. After the SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACKS on the U.S. in 2001,
Blair allied the United Kingdom with the U.S. and its president, GEORGE
W. BUSH, in a global war against terrorism. In late 2002 Blair and Bush
accused the Iraqi government of ÍADD0M hUSSEIN of continuing to possess
and develop biological, chemical, and nuclear weapons in violation of UN
mandates. Despite deep divisions within his own party and strong public
opposition to a war with Iraq, Blair, with Bush, led an attack on Iraq that
toppled hussein’s regime in March–April 2003.
Blais
Blakey, Art later Abdullah Ibn Buhaina (b. Oct. 11, 1919, Pitts-
Blalock
Blaue Reiter
blitzkrieg
MACULAR DEGENERATION; VISUAL-FIELD DEFECT.
Bliss, Sir Arthur (Edward Drummond) (b. Aug. 2, 1891, Lon-
Bliss, William D(wight) P(orter) (b. Aug. 20, 1856, Constantino-
supported the RUHR OCCUPATION (1923) to force Germany to pay reparations.
It gradually lost public support, and it was defeated in the 1924 elections.
Bloch
Blount
mals and trail persons. A large, strong dog, the bloodhound stands 23–27
in. (58–69 cm) and weighs 80–110 lb (35–50 kg). It has short hair and
long ears, with loose skin that falls into folds and wrinkles around the
head and neck. The coat is black-and-tan, red-brown and tan, or tawny.
Bloodless Revolution See GLORIOUS REVOLUTION
Bloomer, Amelia orig. Amelia Jenks (b. May 27, 1818, Homer,
blue-green algae See CYANOBAC-
TERIA
blue ground See KIMBERLITE
blue law U.S. statute regulating
work, commerce, and amusements on Sundays. The name is said to derive
from a list of Sabbath regulations published (on blue paper or in blue
wrappers) in New Haven, Conn., in 1781. Throughout colonial New
England such laws regulated morals and conduct. Most lapsed after the
American Revolution, but some, such as prohibitions against the Sunday
sale of alcoholic beverages, remain on the books in some areas.
Blue Mountains Plateau region, part of the GREAT DIVIDING RANGE,
southeastern AUSTRALIA. Located in NEW SOUTH WALES, the region rises to
about 3,600 ft (1,100 m). Once used as a retreat by wealthy SYDNEY resi-
dents, it is now accessible by good roads and is a popular tourist area; the
Blue Mountains area was designated a UNESCO WORLD HERITAGE SITE in
2000. The city of Blue Mountains (pop., 2004 est.: 77,011) was incorpo-
rated in 1947.
Blue Mountains Mountain range, eastern Jamaica. It extends from
north of KINGSTON eastward 30 mi (50 km) to the Caribbean Sea. Its high-
est point is Blue Mountain Peak, at 7,388 ft (2,252 m). It experiences
heavy rain and widely divergent temperatures. Blue Mountain coffee is
famous for its excellent quality.
Blue Nile See NILE RIVER
Blue Ridge or Blue Ridge Mountains Section of the APPALACHIAN
MOUNTAINS, eastern U.S. The range extends southward from Carlisle, Pa.,
through parts of Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina
to Mt. Oglethorpe in Georgia. The highest peaks are in the Black Moun-
tains of North Carolina; the average elevation is 2,000–4,000 ft (600–
1,200 m). The scenic Blue Ridge Parkway, established in 1936 and
administered by the National Park Service, runs 469 mi (755 km) along
the crest.
blue whale Mottled, blue-gray BALEEN WHALE (Balaenoptera musculus),
also called sulfur-bottom whale because of the yellowish DIATOMS on some
individuals. The largest of all animals, the blue whale reaches a maxi-
mum length of about 100 ft (30 m) and a maximum weight of 150 tons
(136,000 kg). It is found alone or in small groups in all oceans. In sum-
mer it feeds on KRILL in polar waters, and in winter it moves toward the
equator to breed. It was once the most important of the commercially
hunted baleen whales, and its populations were greatly reduced. Listed as
an ENDANGERED SPECIES, it is now protected.
Bluebeard or Gilles de Rais
wearing at the time. The word bluestocking came to be applied derisively
to a woman who affects literary or learned interests.
Bluford
the foundation for JAZZ, RHYTHM AND BLUES, and ROCK MUSIC.
often criticized for their stereotyped characters, simple writing style, and
didactic moralism, her books were widely translated and remained inter-
nationally popular long after her death.
BMW in full Bayerische Motoren Werke
Boccaccio
India). The tree growing on the site now is believed to be a descendant
of the original, planted from a cutting of a tree in Sri Lanka that had been
propagated from the original; both trees are sites of pilgrimage for Bud-
dhists. The bo tree or a representation of its leaf has often been used as
a symbol of the Buddha.
Bodhidharma
Bogarde
German GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE of the
15th century.
Bohemond
Boito
America’s poorest countries, Bolivia was
plagued by governmental instability for
much of the 20th century. Social and eco-
nomic tension continued in the early 21st
century, fueled by resistance to govern-
ment efforts to eradicate the growth of coca (from which the narcotic
cocaine is derived), by unrest among Bolivia’s Indians, and by disagree-
ments over how to exploit the country’s vast natural gas reserves.
dancers, including YEKATERINA GELTZER, VASILY TIKHOMIROV, GALINA ULANOVA,
Boltzmann
Bonaparte,
relations between the brothers. However, he offered Napoleon help dur-
ing the HUNDRED DAYS and was the last to defend Napoleon’s prerogatives
at the time of his second abdication, after which he lived in Italy.
(Marie-) Pauline (b. Oct. 20, 1780, Ajaccio,
Corsica—d. June 9, 1825, Florence) French noblewoman. A sister of
NAPOLEON, in 1797 she married one of his staff officers, Gen. C.V.E.
Leclerc (1772–1802). After Leclerc’s death, she married Prince Camillo
F.L. Borghese (1803) and went with him to Rome. She soon tired of him
and returned to Paris, where her behaviour caused some scandal. In 1806
she received the title of duchess of Guastalla. She died of cancer in Flo-
rence.
Bonaventure
CALCIUM DEFICIENCY). The process also causes underutilized bone, as in an
immobilized limb, to atrophy. Bone disorders include RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS,
OSTEOARTHRITIS, RICKETS, OSTEOPOROSIS, and TUMOURs. Bone can fracture sud-
denly or over time, as in stress fractures.
Bône See ANNABA
bone china Hard-paste PORCELAIN containing bone ash. It was developed
by Josiah Spode (1754–1827)
England c. 1800. The addition of
bone ash to china stone and china
clay (i.e., hard china) made bone
china easier to manufacture;
stronger, does not chip easily, and
has an ivory-white colour that lends
itself to decoration. Other factories
(Minton, Derby, Worcester, WEDG-
WOOD, Rockingham) adopted the for-
mula in the early 19th century. Bone
china remains popular for tableware
in Britain and the U.S. See also
STONEWARE.
bone marrow or myeloid tis-
Bonheur
Bonnard
LINDISFARNE GOSPELS.
Booker Prize in full (2002– ) Man Booker Prize Prestigious Brit-
ish award given annually to a full-length novel. It was established in 1968
by the multinational company Booker McConnell as a counterpart to the
French Prix Goncourt. The Booker Prize Foundation administers the prize,
aided by an advisory committee. Entries, which are nominated by publish-
ers, must be written by an English-language author from the United King-
dom, the Commonwealth countries, Ireland, or South Africa. Its winners
have included KINGSLEY AMIS, A.S. BYATT, RUTH PRAWER JHABVALA, and SALMAN
RUSHDIE. In 1992 a Booker Russian Novel Prize was introduced.
book (cid:2) Boolean algebra
Jane Patterson’s bookplate designed by
Robert Anning Bell, English, 1890s
COURTESY OF THE VICTORIA AND ALBERT MUSEUM,
LONDON
Boolean algebra Symbolic sys-
tem used for designing logic circuits
and networks for DIGITAL COMPUTERS. Its
chief utility is in representing the
truth value of statements, rather than
the numeric quantities handled by
ordinary algebra. It lends itself to use
in the binary system employed by
digital computers, since the only pos-
sible truth values, true and false, can
be represented by the binary digits 1
and 0. A circuit in computer memory
can be open or closed, depending on
the value assigned to it, and it is the
integrated work of such circuits that
George Boole, engraving.
COURTESY OF THE TRUSTEES OF THE BRITISH MUSEUM;
PHOTOGRAPH, J.R. FREEMAN & CO. LTD.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Boone, Daniel
Bophuthatswana
Booth, Edwin (Thomas)
WILKES BOOTH
HELIOTROPES, and lungworts (Pulmo-
naria). Borage is also used as an
herbal and bee plant and eaten as a
vegetable.
Borah, William E(dgar)
borax or tincal
Beings (1967) almost erase the distinctions between prose and poetry.
Though he later repudiated it, he is credited with establishing in South
America the modernist Ultraist movement, a rebellion against the deca-
dence of the established writers of the Generation of ’98.
Borghese family
Borobudur
Bosanquet
boson
botanical garden or botanic garden Originally, a collection of
living plants designed to illustrate relationships within plant groups. Most
modern botanical gardens are concerned primarily with exhibiting orna-
mental plants in a scheme that emphasizes natural relationships. A display
garden of mostly woody plants (shrubs and trees) is often called an ARBO-
RETUM. The botanical garden as an institution can be traced to ancient China
and many Mediterranean countries, where such gardens were often cen-
ters for raising plants used for food and medicines. Botanical gardens are
also reservoirs of valuable heritable characteristics, potentially important
in the breeding of new varieties of plants. Still another function is the
training of gardeners. The world’s most famous botanical garden is KEW
GARDENS.
fossil POLLEN and SPORES). See also FORESTR Y, HORTICULTURE.
Botha
the South African boundary in the southeast. The economy traditionally
depends on livestock raising; the development of diamond mining has
increased the country’s wealth. Botswana is a republic with one legisla-
tive body; its head of state and government is the president. The region’s
earliest inhabitants were the Khoekhoe and San. Sites were settled as early
as AD 190 during the southerly migration of Bantu-speaking farmers.
Tswana dynasties, which developed in the western TRANSVAAL in the 13th–
14th centuries, moved into Botswana in the 18th century and established
several powerful states. European missionaries arrived in the early 19th
century, but it was the discovery of gold in 1867 that excited European
interest. In 1885 the area became the British Bechuanaland Protectorate,
remaining so until the 1960s. In 1966 the Republic of Bechuanaland was
proclaimed as an independent member of the British COMMONWEALTH, and
later that year its name was changed to Botswana. Independent Botswana
tried to maintain a delicate balance between its economic dependence on
South Africa and its relations with the surrounding black countries; the
independence of Namibia in 1990 and South Africa’s rejection of apart-
heid eased tensions.
Botticelli
Camulodunum (Colchester), Verulamium (St. Albans), and part of Lond-
inium (London) and military posts; according to TACITUS, her forces massa-
cred up to 70,000 Romans and pro-Roman Britons and destroyed the
Roman 9th Legion. She is thought to have taken poison or died of shock
when the Roman governor rallied his troops and destroyed her huge army.
Boudin
boulevards originally followed the city walls (the word originally meant
“bulwark”) and were built in the ancient Middle East, especially at Anti-
och. In Paris, straight and geometrically precise boulevards were incor-
porated into design principles taught at the École des BEAUX-ARTS, and they
form a prominent feature of the city. Similar boulevards are found in other
cities such as Washington, D.C. Formal curving boulevards are a feature
of such cities as Vienna and Prague.
Boulez
Bourgeois
Bow porcelain
bowls or lawn bowls or lawn bowling Bowling game similar to
the Italian BOCCIE and the French BOULES played on a green with wooden
balls (called bowls) that are rolled at a target ball (the jack). The object
is to roll one’s bowls so that they come to rest nearer to the jack than
those of an opponent, sometimes achieved by knocking aside an oppo-
nent’s bowl or jack. One point is awarded for each winning bowl. Depend-
ing on the game, players use four, three, or two bowls, and games end at
18 or 21 points.
Bowman
Boyer
Bradley, Bill in full William Warren Bradley (b. July 28, 1943,
the SEMINOLE WARS and the MEXICAN
the BATTLE OF
WAR. When North Carolina seceded,
he joined the Confederate army and
fought in the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR. He
was promoted to general in 1862 at
the BATTLE OF SHILOH. As commander
of the Army of Tennessee, he led his
troops to victory at
CHICKAMAUGA. His forces besieged
the Union troops at Chattanooga but
were eventually routed. He was
relieved
command
appointed military adviser to Con-
federate Pres. JEFFERSON DAVIS.
Bragg law Relation between the
spacing of atomic planes in crystals
and the angles of incidence at which
the planes produce the most intense
LIAM BRAGG.
Brahe
brahma-loka
also exist for other languages, for mathematical and technical material,
and for musical notation. Braille may be handwritten—from right to left—
using a stylus to press dots into a piece of paper between hinged metal
plates; when the sheet is turned over, the dots face up and are read from
left to right. Braille typewriters and electric embossing machines are also
used.
Braille
friction and circulation of the liquid (usually water) from a series of pock-
ets in the rotor to a series of complementary pockets in the stator. See also
AIR BRAKE.
Bramante
Indians
in Connecticut. He
fought for the British in the last
FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR (1754–63).
He led four of
the six IROQUOIS
nations on the British side in the
AMERICAN REVOLUTION, winning several
notable battles. After the war Brant
was granted land along the Grand
River in Ontario, Can., where he
ruled peacefully and continued his
missionary work.
Brant, Sebastian (b. 1458?,
Strassburg—d. May
1521,
Strassburg) German poet. He taught
law and later was appointed imperial
councillor and court palatine by
MAXIMILIAN I. His varied writings
include works on law, religion, poli-
tics, and especially morals. His best-
known work is The Ship of Fools
(1494), an allegory telling of fools
on a ship bound for a “fool’s para-
dise.” The most famous German literary work of the 15th century, it ridi-
cules the vices of the age and gave rise to a whole school of fool’s
literature.
Braque
Brandt, Bill orig. Hermann Wilhelm Brandt (b. May 1904, Ham-
Brandt, Willy orig. Herbert Ernst Karl Frahm (b. Dec. 18, 1913,
ECONOMIC COMMUNITY. For
naval and admiralty brasses, in which a small amount of tin improves
resistance to corrosion by seawater; and aluminum brasses, which pro-
vide strength and corrosion resistance where the naval brasses may fail.
brass instrument Musical wind instrument, usually made of brass or
other metal, in which the vibration of the player’s lips against a cup- or
funnel-shaped mouthpiece causes the initial vibration of an air column.
The TRUMPET, TROMBONE, FRENCH HORN, TUBA, EUPHONIUM, SOUSAPHONE, CORNET,
FLÜGELHORN, and BUGLE, as well as historical instruments such as the ophi-
cleide, cornett, and serpent, are considered brass instruments (though the
last two were made of wood); the saxophones, though made of brass, are
Brassaï
Brazos
Brébeuf
Bremen
dialects; this disunity has hindered efforts to form orthographic and lit-
erary standards. Though Breton may have half a million speakers, use of
the language is generally thought to be in sharp decline among younger
people despite a resurgence of regional particularism in western Europe.
BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT (WORLD BANK) and the INTERNA-
TIONAL MONETAR Y FUND. See also JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES.
bretwalda
274 I bridewealth (cid:2) Bridget
bridewealth Payment made by the groom or his kin to the kin of the
wife in order to ratify the marriage. The practice is common in most parts
of the globe in one form or another, but it is perhaps most prevalent in
Africa. It is most often a matter of social and symbolic as well as eco-
nomic reciprocity, being part of a long series of exchanges between the
two intermarrying families. It represents a pledge that the wife will be
well treated and serves as compensation for her family’s loss. Payment
may consist of goods or, less frequently, services, and it may be paid in
one sum or regularly over a long period of time. See also DOWR Y.
bridge Structure that spans horizontally to allow pedestrians and
vehicles to cross a void. Bridge construction has always presented civil
engineering with its greatest challenges. The simplest bridge is the beam
(or girder) bridge, consisting of straight, rigid beams of steel or concrete
placed across a span. Ancient Roman bridges are famous for their rounded
arch form, which permitted spans much longer than those of stone beams
and were more durable than wood. A modern version of the arch bridge
might have a trussed arch anchored to the abutments and a deck hanging
from the arch by vertical cables. Suspension bridges (e.g., BROOKLYN BRIDGE,
GOLDEN GATE BRIDGE) are capable of spanning great distances; their main
support members are cables composed of thousands of strands of wire
supported by two towers and anchored at each end, and the deck is sus-
pended by vertical cables hung from the main cables. In cable-stayed
bridges, cables fan out and down from a central tower to various points
on the deck; variations of this design have resulted in bridges of striking
design and very long span. Other bridges include the truss bridge, popu-
lar (e.g., for railroad bridges) because it uses a relatively small amount
of material to carry large loads, and the cantilever bridge, typically made
with three spans, with the outer spans anchored down at the shore and the
central span resting on the cantilevered arms.
Bridges, Harry orig. Alfred Bryant Renton (b. July 28, 1901,
Bridges, Robert
(Seymour)
(b. Oct. 23, 1844, Walmer, Kent,
Eng.—d. April 21, 1930, Boar’s Hill,
Oxford) English poet. He published
several long poems and poetic dra-
mas, but his reputation rests on the
lyrics collected in Shorter Poems
(1890, 1894), which reveal his mas-
tery of prosody. His 1916 edition of
the poetry of his friend GERARD MAN-
LEY HOPKINS rescued it from obscurity.
He was poet
laureate of England
from 1913 until his death.
c. 1303,
Swed.—d. July 23, 1373, Rome;
canonized Oct. 8, 1391; feast day
July 23) Mystic and patron saint of
Sweden. She had religious visions
from an early age but married and
had eight children,
including St.
Catherine of Sweden. On the death
of her husband (1344), she retired to
Bridget, Saint
Robert Bridges, gold-point drawing by
W. Strang; in the National Portrait
Gallery, London
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY,
LONDON
Three common types of bridge design.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
brigade
276 I Bristol (cid:2) British Library
British Airways in full British Airways PLC International passen-
ger airline based in London. In 1936 British Airways Ltd. was founded
through the merger of three smaller airlines. A merger with Imperial Air-
ways in 1939 created British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC). The
British Airways name returned in 1974 with the government-mandated
merger of BOAC and British European Airways (BEA). The airline was
privatized in 1987. It merged with British Caledonian later that year. Brit-
ish Airways is one of Europe’s largest air carriers.
British American Tobacco PLC formerly British-American
Tobacco Company Ltd. (1902–76) and B.A.T Industries PLC
(1976–98) British conglomerate that is one of the world’s largest manu-
facturers of tobacco products. The company’s international headquarters
are in London, while its chief American subsidiary, Brown & Williamson
Tobacco Corporation, is headquartered in Louisville, Ky. Its acquisitions
have included the American Tobacco Company (1994), which represents
such cigarette brands as Pall Mall and Lucky Strike; Rothmans Interna-
tional (1999), known for its Dunhill and Rothmans brands; and Canada’s
largest cigarette company, Imperial Tobacco (2000).
British Broadcasting Corp. See BBC
province (founded 1908). It comprises faculties of agricultural sciences,
applied science, arts, commerce and business administration, dentistry,
education, forestry, graduate studies, law, medicine, pharmacy, theology,
and science. Plant research is conducted at the UBC Botanical Garden,
which is open to the public. The university has extensive study-abroad
and continuing-education programs.
British Commonwealth See COMMONWEALTH
British Expeditionary Force (BEF) Home-based regular British
army forces sent to northern France at the start of World Wars I and II to
support the French armies. Britain wished to help France in case of a Ger-
man attack, and the BEF was created in 1908 to ensure that British forces
would be trained and ready to respond quickly. It consisted of six INFAN-
TR Y divisions and one CAVALR Y division. Five divisions sent to France at the
outbreak of World War I sustained heavy losses and were succeeded by
vast British armies. Divisions sent to France early in World War II (1939)
returned to England when France fell the next year.
British Guiana See GUYANA
British Honduras See BELIZE
British Invasion Musical movement. In the mid 1960s the popularity
of a number of British rock-and-roll (“beat”) groups spread rapidly to the
U.S., beginning with the triumphant arrival of Liverpool’s BEATLES in New
York in 1964 and continuing with the ROLLING STONES, the Animals, and
others. Building on 1950s U.S. models, these groups incorporated such
local musical traditions as skiffle (acoustic drummerless ensembles),
dancehall, and Celtic folk.
British Library National library of Great Britain, formed by the Brit-
ish Library Act (1972) and organized July 1, 1973. It consists of the former
BRITISH MUSEUM library, the National Central Library, the National Lending
Library for Science and Technology, and the British National Bibliogra-
phy. The British Museum library, founded in 1753 based on earlier col-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
British Virgin Islands See British VIRGIN ISLANDS
Brittany French Bretagne
SATIN or TWILL weave (see WEAVING).
The background may be twill, satin,
or plain weave. The rich,
fairly
heavy fabric is frequently used for
evening
dresses,
draperies,
upholstery.
broccoli Plant (Brassica oleracea,
Botrytis group) closely related to
CABBAGE in the MUSTARD FAMILY. A fast-
Broch
Bronzino
Brontosaurus See APATOSAURUS
Bronx Zoo formally New York Zoological Park ZOO in New
Brooks, Romaine Goddard orig. Beatrice Romaine God-
Brouwer
Brooks Islands See MIDWAY
Brooks Range Mountain range, northern Alaska, U.S. It extends about
600 mi (1,000 km) from Kotzebue Sound to the Canadian border. Its
highest peak is Mount Isto, at 9,060 ft (2,760 m). Forming the northwest-
ern end of the ROCKY MOUNTAINS, it lies within GATES OF THE ARCTIC NATIONAL
PARK. Huge reserves of oil were discovered at PRUDHOE BAY, and the range
is crossed at Atigun Pass by the TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE.
Brooks, Gwendolyn (Elizabeth) (b. June 7, 1917, Topeka, Kan.,
World War I. In 1921 he joined the U.S. Communist Party; he served as
the party’s general secretary from 1930 to 1944 and was its presidential
candidate in 1936 and 1940. In 1944 he was removed from his position
for declaring that capitalism and socialism could coexist, and in 1946 he
was expelled from the party.
Brown, Capability orig. Lancelot Brown (b. 1715, Kirkharle,
Brown, Jim orig. James Nathaniel Brown (b. Feb. 17, 1936, St.
Simons, Ga., U.S.) U.S. football player, often considered the greatest run-
ning back of all time. He was an All-American in football and lacrosse
at Syracuse University. In his nine seasons with the Cleveland Browns
(1957–65), he set NFL overall rushing and combined yardage records that
Brown, C. (cid:2) Brown, W.
the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
282 I brown bear (cid:2) browser
TREAT DAVIDSON—THE NATIONAL AUDUBON SOCIETY
COLLECTION/PHOTO RESEARCHERS
Brown trout (Salmo trutta)
Brown v. Board of Education (of Topeka) (1954) U.S. Supreme
Court case in which the court ruled unanimously that RACIAL SEGREGATION
in public schools violated the 14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
The amendment says that no state may deny equal protection of the laws
to any person within its jurisdiction. The court declared separate educa-
tional facilities to be inherently unequal, thus reversing its 1896 ruling in
PLESSY V. FERGUSON. The Brown ruling was limited to public schools, but it
was believed to imply that segregation is not permissible in other public
facilities. Guidelines for ending segregation were presented and school
boards were advised to proceed “with all deliberate speed.” See also THUR-
GOOD MARSHALL.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Browning, Robert (b. May 7,
Elizabeth Barrett Browning, detail of an
oil painting by Michele Gordigiani,
1858; in the National Portrait Gallery,
London.
Browning, Elizabeth Barrett orig. Elizabeth Barrett (b. March
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY,
LONDON
Browning, Tod orig. Charles Albert Browning (b. July 12, 1880,
Brownshirts See SA
standard style rules. Netscape Navigator became the dominant Web
browser soon after its release in 1994; Microsoft’s Internet Explorer was
introduced a year later and has become widespread.
Brubeck, Dave orig. David Warren Brubeck (b. Dec. 6, 1920,
Bruce, Lenny orig. Leonard Alfred Schneider (b. Oct. 13, 1925,
Mineola, N.Y., U.S.—d. Aug. 3, 1966, Hollywood, Calif.) U.S. stand-up
comedian. He studied acting and began performing stand-up routines in
nightclubs in the 1950s, soon developing a style marked by black humour
and punctuated with obscenity. As he gained notoriety, he focused his
material on criticisms of the social and legal establishments, organized
religion, and other controversial subjects. His reputation acquired iconic
status as a daring performer and an activist for free speech after his death
from a drug overdose.
brucellosis
dancer. From 1937 he studied at the
Royal Danish Ballet training school,
and in 1947 he joined the company.
He performed as guest soloist with
many other companies,
including
American Ballet Theatre in the
1950s and ’60s, dancing leading
roles in such ballets as La Sylphide,
Swan Lake, and Carmen. He was
admired for his classical technique.
He later served as director of the
Royal Swedish Opera House (1967–
72) and assistant director (1973–81)
and director (1983–86) of Canada’s
National Ballet.
bruise or contusion Visible blu-
ish or purplish mark beneath the sur-
face of unbroken skin,
indicating
burst blood vessels in deeper tissue
layers. Bruises are usually caused by
a blow or pressure, but they may occur spontaneously in elderly persons.
The yellowish hue that becomes visible as a bruise heals comes from the
disintegration and gradual absorption of blood.
Brumaire
Brunelleschi
world law by espousing arbitration to prevent war. A believer in a literal
interpretation of the Bible, he was a prosecuting attorney in the SCOPES TRIAL
(1925), in which he debated CLARENCE DARROW on the issue of evolution;
the trial took a heavy toll on his health, and he died soon after it ended.
Bryant, Bear orig. Paul William Bryant (b. Sept. 11, 1913,
WALDO EMERSON and HENR Y DAVID THO-
REAU. Admitted to the bar at age 21,
he spent nearly 10 years as an attor-
ney, a profession he hated. His
Poems
(1821),
including “To a
Waterfowl,” secured his reputation.
In 1825 he moved to New York City,
where for almost 50 years (1829–78)
he was editor in chief of the Evening
Post, which he transformed into an
organ of progressive thought.
Bryce Canyon National Park
Park, southern Utah, U.S. It is not a
true canyon but rather a series of
natural amphitheatres below which
stands an array of limestone and
sandstone columns. Its geology is related to that of GRAND CANYON and
ZION national parks, since the stone of all three was formed while the entire
region was under a shallow sea. The park, established in 1928, covers
35,835 acres (14,513 hectares).
Bryn Mawr
gian rebellion in 1830 and then the capital of Belgium. An important
industrial and commercial city, it is the headquarters of both NATO and
the EUROPEAN UNION.
Brutus, Marcus Junius or Quintus Caepio Brutus (b. 85—d.
Bruyère, Jean de La See Jean
de LA BRUYERE
Bryan, William Jennings (b.
March
1860,
Salem,
Ill.,
U.S.—d. July 26, 1925, Dayton,
Tenn.) U.S. politician and orator. He
practiced law at Jacksonville, Ill.
(1883–87), before moving to Lin-
coln, Neb., where he was elected to
the U.S. Congress in 1890. In the
U.S. House
of Representatives
(1891–95), he became the national
leader of the FREE SILVER MOVEMENT; he
advocated its aims in his “Cross of
Gold” speech, which won him the
DEMOCRATIC PARTY nomination for
president in 1896. He was the party’s
nominee again in 1900 and 1908. In
1901 he founded a newspaper, The
Commoner, and thereafter lectured
widely to admiring audiences; he
was called “the Great Commoner.”
He helped secure the presidential
nomination for WOODROW WILSON in
1912 and served as his secretary of
state
(1913–15),
contributing to
and gelatinous to hard with calcium-containing skeletons. Freshwater bry-
ozoans attach primarily to leaves, stems, and tree roots in shallow water.
Marine bryozoans have a wide range of habitats, from coastal areas to
great ocean depths, but are most common just below the tidemarks. Bry-
ozoans feed by capturing plankton with their tentacles.
brytenwalda See BRETWALDA
BSE See MAD COW DISEASE
Buber
Buchwald
buddleia
of MASS ACTION.
Buffon
electrical wiring, HVAC (HEATING, VENTILATING, and AIR-CONDITIONING), WIN-
DOWS, FLOOR COVERINGS, plasterwork, MOLDINGS, ceramic TILE, cabinets, and
other features. See also ARCHITECTURE.
building stone See building STONE
Bujumbura
counterthrust in the wooded Ardennes region of southern Belgium. The
German drive, led by GERD VON RUNDSTEDT’s PANZER army, was initially suc-
cessful but was halted by Allied resistance and reinforcements led by
GEORGE PATTON. The Germans withdrew in January 1945, but both sides
suffered heavy losses.
Buli style
bulletin-board system (BBS) Computerized system used to
Bülow
MOROCCAN CRISES.
Bülow
Bunin
Burbidge, (Eleanor) Marga-
ret orig. Eleanor Margaret
SYNTHESIS).
burbot
Wind (1910), introduced the animal characters that were to populate his
subsequent stories, which were published in many languages. He pro-
moted conservationism through his “Wildlife Protection Program,” his
“Radio Nature League,” and other organizations. He wrote more than 170
books and 15,000 stories for newspaper columns.
Burgess
Burne-Jones
LESQUE SHOW).
burlesque show Stage entertainment composed of slapstick sketches,
bawdy humour, chorus numbers, and solo dances. Introduced in the U.S.
in 1868 by a company of English chorus girls, it developed as a version
of the MINSTREL SHOW, divided into three parts: (1) a series of coarse humor-
ous songs, slapstick sketches, and comic monologues; (2) the olio, or
mixture of variety acts (e.g., acrobats, magicians, singers); and (3) cho-
rus numbers and occasionally a takeoff, or burlesque, on politics or a cur-
rent play. The show ended with an exotic dancer or a boxing match. In
the early 20th century, many performers, including FANNY BRICE, AL JOL-
SON, and W.C. FIELDS, began their careers in burlesque. The addition of the
striptease in the 1920s made a star of GYPSY ROSE LEE, but censorship and
competition from motion pictures soon led to burlesque’s decline.
Burlingame, Anson (b. Nov. 14, 1820, New Berlin, N.Y., U.S.—d.
Feb. 23, 1870, St. Petersburg, Russia) U.S. diplomat. He served in the
U.S. House of Representatives (1855–61) and helped found the REPUBLICAN
PARTY. As U.S. minister to China (1861–67), he implemented a policy of
cooperation between China and the Western powers. He so impressed the
Burnet
Burschenschaft
bus (cid:2) Bush
George W. Bush.
the ELECTORAL COLLEGE (271–266). In
ERIC DRAPER/WHITE HOUSE PHOTO
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
bushid§
ogy, presented a refutation of hedonism and of the notion that self-interest
is the ultimate principle of good conduct.
Butler, Nicholas M(urray) (b. April 2, 1862, Elizabeth, N.J.,
U.S.—d. Dec. 7, 1947, New York, N.Y.) U.S. educator. He received his
Ph.D. from Columbia University. He was the founding president of what
is today Columbia’s Teachers College (1886–91). As president of Colum-
bia University itself (1901–45), he led the institution to world renown.
Early in his career he criticized prevailing pedagogical methods, but later
he turned on pedagogical reform itself, decrying vocationalism in educa-
tion and behaviorism in psychology. A champion of international under-
standing, he helped establish the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace in 1910 and served as its president (1925–45). In 1931 he shared
the Nobel Peace Prize with JANE ADDAMS.
Butler, R(ichard) A(usten), baron of Saffron Walden (b. Dec.
buttress Exterior support, usually of masonry, projecting from the face
of a wall and serving to strengthen it or resist outward thrust from an arch
or roof. Buttresses also have a decorative function. Though used since
ancient times (Mesopotamian temples featured decorative buttresses, as
did Roman and Byzantine structures), they are especially associated with
GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE. See also FLYING BUTTRESS.
Butung See BUTON
Buwayhid dynasty See BãYID DYNASTY
Buxtehude
byssinosis
C High-level procedural computer PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE with many low-
level features, including the ability to handle memory addresses and bits.
It is highly portable among platforms and therefore widely used in indus-
try and among computer professionals. C was developed by Dennis M.
Ritchie (born 1941) of Bell Laboratories in 1972. The OPERATING SYSTEM
UNIX was written almost exclusively in C, and C has been standardized
as part of POSIX (Portable Operating System Interface for UNIX).
VISION.
Cabral
Cacus and Caca
tury. The English took it in 1346 and 1417 and held it until 1450. It suf-
fered in the Wars of RELIGION and fell to the Protestants in 1562. During
the FRENCH REVOLUTION it was a centre for the GIRONDIN movement. The city
was severely damaged in the Allied NORMANDY CAMPAIGN (1944), but it
was rebuilt. Notable structures include the 11th-century abbey and the
university. Caen is a transportation centre and manufactures automobiles
and electrical equipment.
Caere
Caillaux
only some 85,000 people reported themselves to be Acadian/Cajun, the
census form also included a French Canadian category, which may have
confused the issue. Experts suggest that there are some 100,000 Cajuns
in Texas and from 500,000 to 700,000 Cajuns in Louisiana. In recent
decades Cajun cuisine, noted for its use of spicy seasonings, and ZYDECO
music have become popular among non-Cajuns.
cakravartin See CHAKRAVARTIN
Calabar
DEVICES ushered in calculators that could perform mathematical functions
in addition to basic arithmetic, and also store data and instructions in
memory registers, providing programming capabilities similar to those of
small computers.
calculus Field of mathematics that analyzes aspects of change in pro-
cesses or systems that can be modeled by FUNCTIONs. Through its two pri-
mary tools—the DERIVATIVE and the INTEGRAL—it allows precise calculation
of rates of change and of the total amount of change in such a system.
The derivative and the integral grew out of the idea of a LIMIT, the logical
extension of the concept of a function over smaller and smaller intervals.
The relationship between DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS and INTEGRAL CALCULUS, known
Calcutta See KOLKATA
Caldecott
calendula
Californian Indian Any member
INDIAN; POMO; YUMAn.
Caligula
Callas
calumet
Cambodian See KHMER
Cambodian language See KHMER LANGUAGE
Cambon
Cambridge Agreement Pledge made in Cambridge, England, in
1629 by Puritan stockholders of the Massachusetts Bay Co. to emigrate
to New England if the colony’s government could be transferred there.
The company agreed and shifted control of the corporation to the signers
of the agreement. JOHN WINTHROP was elected governor, and he set sail in
1630 with a large group of Puritan followers to settle in the Boston area
(see MASSACHUSETTS BAY COLONY).
Cambridge Platonists
of mountains that form a natural boundary between Cameroon and Nige-
ria. RICHARD BURTON climbed its summit in 1861. The volcano last erupted
in 2000.
Camilla In ROMAN MYTHOLOGY, a legendary warrior maiden and favourite
of DIANA. According to VIRGIL, her father dedicated her to Diana and trained
her as a hunter and warrior, and she led a band of warriors that included
women. She fought against AENEAS and was killed as she chased a retreat-
ing soldier.
Camillus
Neapolis (Naples). After the fall of Rome, Campania was ruled by Gaul,
Byzantium, and the Normans; it became part of the Kingdom of Naples
in 1282. It was united with Italy in 1861. Its economy is bolstered by
agriculture, the industrial area around Naples, and tourism.
campanile
Campion, Jane (b. April 30,
Campo Formio
the BRITISH NORTH AMERICA ACT of 1867.
Canadian Alliance French Alliance Canadienne Former con-
Canadian Broadcasting Corp. (CBC) Canadian public broadcast-
ing service, created in 1936 to promote Canadian culture and serve as an
instrument of national unity. It offers French- and English-language pro-
grams over AM and FM radio networks, television networks, cable tele-
vision channels, and shortwave radio. Noted for its news and public affairs
programs, the CBC also presents documentaries, dramas, classical music,
entertainment, and educational programs as well as sports programs.
Canadian Football League (CFL) Major Canadian professional
gridiron FOOTBALL organization, formed in 1958. The league’s Western Con-
ference includes teams from Edmonton, Calgary, British Columbia,
Saskatchewan, and Winnipeg; its Eastern Conference comprises teams
from Hamilton, Montreal, Ottawa, and Toronto. The conference winners
compete for the Grey Cup. The CFL plays a gridiron style of football.
Canadian Labour Congress (CLC) Nationwide association of
labour unions in Canada. The CLC was formed in 1956 by the merger of
the Canadian counterparts to the American Federation of Labor and the
Congress of Industrial Organizations, which merged in the same year (see
AFL-CIO). It represents roughly 3 million unionized workers across
Canada.
Canadian National Railway Co. Corporation created by the
Canadian government in 1918 to operate a number of nationalized rail-
roads (including the old Grand Trunk lines, Intercolonial Railway,
National Transcontinental Railway, and Canadian Northern Railway) as
one of Canada’s two transcontinental railroad systems. Its passenger ser-
vices were taken over by VIA Rail Canada in 1978, and the company was
privatized in 1995. The Canadian National Railway stretches across
Canada from Nova Scotia to Vancouver. It bought the Illinois Central
Corp. in 1999, thus acquiring a railroad network that links Canada to the
Gulf of Mexico.
Canadian Pacific Railway Ltd. (CPR) Privately owned company
Canaletto
Canaris
ceptibility. Triggers include hormones, viruses, smoking, diet, and radia-
tion. Cancer can begin in almost any tissue, including blood (see LEUKEMIA)
and lymph (see LYMPHOMA). When it metastasizes, it remains a cancer of its
tissue of origin. Early diagnosis and treatment increase the chance of cure.
Treatment may include CHEMOTHERAPY, surgery, and RADIATION THERAPY. See
also BLADDER CANCER; BREAST CANCER; CARCINOGEN; COLORECTAL CANCER; KAPOSI SAR-
COMA; LAR YNGEAL CANCER; LUNG CANCER; OVARIAN CANCER; PANCREATIC CANCER;
PROSTATE CANCER; SKIN CANCER; STOMACH CANCER; UTERINE CANCER.
Cancer, Tropic of See TROPIC OF CANCER
Cancún
cannabis
NEOCLASSICISM).
Canso, Strait of or Canso Gut Channel, NOVA SCOTIA, Canada. Sepa-
rating mainland Nova Scotia and CAPE BRETON ISLAND, it is 4.5 mi (23 km)
long and 1 mi (2 km) wide, with depths of 200 ft (60 m). Since 1955 the
7,000-ft (2,100-m) Canso Causeway has linked Cape Breton with the
mainland. A navigation lock can handle most oceangoing vessels.
Cantabria
Cantor, Eddie orig. Edward Israel Iskowitz (b. Jan. 31, 1892,
Cantor
capacitance
Aapek
Capote
He and his followers wore robes with pointed hoods (Italian, cappuccino),
went barefoot, and lived in extreme poverty. Other Franciscans harassed
them, and the pope forbade them to extend their membership outside Italy.
The new order was nearly ruined by the defection of their vicar-general,
Bernardino Ochino, to Protestantism in 1542, but it later grew quickly,
reaching a membership of 17,000 by 1571. It was active in the COUNTER-
REFORMATION in keeping the common people loyal to Catholicism. An inde-
pendent order since 1619, they are known for their missionary and social
work.
capuchin (monkey)
eral chemical formula Cn(H2O)n. The carbon (C) atoms are bonded to
hydrogen atoms (5H), hydroxyl groups (5OH; see FUNCTIONAL GROUP),
and carbonyl groups (5C6O), whose combinations, order, and geomet-
ric arrangement lead to a large number of ISOMERs with the same chemi-
cal formula but different properties. The class is further enlarged because
each isomer has various derivatives: uronic acids, sugars with an oxidized
group; sugar alcohols, sugars with a reduced group; GLYCOSIDEs, com-
pounds of sugars with other molecules containing a hydroxyl group; and
amino sugars, sugars with an amino group (see AMINO ACID).
carbolic acid
carbonyl chloride See PHOSGENE
Carborundum
R. ARKWRIGHT, and JOHANN BODMER.
cardiology Medical specialty dealing with HEART DISEASES and disorders.
It began with the 1749 publication by Jean Baptiste de Sénac of contem-
porary knowledge of the heart. Diagnostic methods improved in the 19th
century, and in 1905 the electrocardiograph was invented. The 20th cen-
tury saw many surgical advances in cardiology, including heart transplants
and the use of ARTIFICIAL HEARTS. Current diagnostic methods include chest
percussion (tapping) and AUSCULTATION, ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY, and echocar-
diography (see ULTRASOUND). Cardiologists provide continuing care of heart
patients, doing basic heart-function studies, supervising therapy, includ-
ing drug therapy, and working closely with heart surgeons.
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) Emergency procedure to
Carducci
Carême
his death. His approximately 15 oratorios
(performed in place of operas during
Lent),
including Baltazar, Ezechia,
Jephte, Jonas, and Judicium extremum
made him the principal oratorio composer of the mid-17th century. He
also wrote some 150 cantatas and nearly 100 motets.
Carl XVI Gustaf Swedish Carl Gustaf Folke Hubertus (b. April
30, 1946, Stockholm, Swed.) King of Sweden from 1973. Grandson of
King Gustav VI Adolf (1882–1973), he became crown prince in 1950, his
father having died in 1947. After studying at military schools, he became
a naval officer. His accession occurred at a time when the role of the
Swedish monarchy was being radically altered; the new constitutional
laws of 1973 left the king with a solely symbolic function rather than a
formal role in the country’s administration.
Carleton, Guy See Guy Carleton, 1st Baron DORCHESTER
Carleton
Carlton, Steve in full Steven Norman Carlton (b. Dec. 22, 1944,
Carmarthen
Carnegie
Carol I
Carpathian Mountains
Carriera
Cartel des Gauches
in Voiron, Isère), the monks distill the liqueur that bears the house’s name.
Carthusian nuns are also strictly cloistered and contemplative.
Cartier
the Mississippi River, wintering in a Sioux village. Though his travel
journal (published 1778) was a huge success, he died penniless.
Cary, (Arthur) Joyce (Lunel) (b. Dec. 7, 1888, Londonderry, Ire.—d.
March 29, 1957, Oxford, Oxfordshire, Eng.) British novelist. Cary stud-
ied art in Edinburgh and Paris before graduating from the University of
Oxford. After serving in West Africa in World War I, he began publish-
ing short stories, then novels, some set in Africa, including An American
Visitor (1933) and Mister Johnson (1939). The Horse’s Mouth (1944), his
best-known novel, was the third in a trilogy in which each volume is nar-
rated by one of three protagonists. Other works include a second trilogy,
A Prisoner of Grace (1952), Except the Lord (1953), and Not Honour
More (1955).
caryatid
Casimir
Bol.?) U.S. outlaw. Taking his name from an older outlaw mentor, Cassidy
was a cattle rustler and a robber from the mid-1880s. In 1900 he became
the criminal partner of Harry Longabaugh, the “Sundance Kid” (1870–
1909?), whose nickname derived from a town where he had once been
imprisoned. They became the foremost members of the Wild Bunch, a
group of bank and train robbers. The two eluded Pinkerton detectives by
escaping to South America in 1901. They bought a ranch in Argentina but
returned to a life of outlawry in 1906. In 1909, trapped by soldiers in
Bolivia, Sundance was mortally wounded, and Cassidy shot himself. The
time, place, and circumstances of their deaths vary widely in different
accounts.
Cassini, Gian Domenico (b. June 8, 1625, Perinaldo, Republic of
Genoa—d. Sept. 14, 1712, Paris, France) Italian-born French astronomer.
His early studies were mainly observations of the Sun, but, after obtain-
ing more powerful telescopes, he turned his attention to the planets. He
calculated Jupiter’s and Mars’s rotational periods and compiled a table of
the positions of Jupiter’s satellites. His observations of the Moon (1671–
79) led to his compiling a large map. In 1683, after a study of the ZODIA-
CAL LIGHT, he concluded it was of cosmic origin. He discovered four of
Saturn’s moons: Iapetus (1671), Rhea (1672), Tethys (1684), and Dione
(1684). The dark gap between two of Saturn’s main rings (Cassini’s divi-
sion) is named for him.
Cassiodorus
ferentiation of larvae into various castes is often determined by diet,
though hormonal and environmental factors can also play a role.
Castelo Branco
beanlike seeds. There are hundreds of natural forms and many horticul-
tural varieties of this species.
castration or neutering Removal of the TESTES. The procedure stops
most production of the hormone TESTOSTERONE. If done before PUBERTY, it pre-
vents the development of functioning adult sex organs. Castration after
sexual maturity makes the sex organs shrink and stop functioning, ending
sperm formation and sexual interest and behaviour. Livestock and pets are
castrated to keep them from reproducing (see STERILIZATION) or to create a
more docile animal. In humans, castration has been used for both cultural
(see EUNUCH, CASTRATO) and medical (e.g., for testicular cancer) reasons.
castrato
catalpa
Cateau-Cambrésis
spired with her lover, GRIGOR Y G., COUNT ORLOV, to force Peter to abdi-
cate (he was murdered soon after) and have herself proclaimed empress.
In her 34-year reign she led Russia into full participation in European
political and cultural life. With her ministers she reorganized the admin-
istration and law of the Russian Empire and extended Russian territory,
adding the Crimea and much of Poland. Though she had once intended
to emancipate the serfs, she instead strengthened the system she had once
condemned as inhuman. She had great energy and wide interests, and her
personal life was notable for her many lovers, including GRIGOR Y POTEMKIN.
Catherine de Médicis
of society. CICERO, then consul, learned of the conspiracy; with Senate
approval, he caught and executed a group of the plotters in Rome, and
later sent the army to defeat and kill Catiline in northern Italy (62).
cation
Cattell
See also MACHISMO; PERSONALISMO.
Caulaincourt
cavalry
into the 1940s. JACK BENNY, ED SULLIVAN, LUCILLE BALL, MAR Y TYLER MOORE, and
CCC See CIVILIAN CONSERVATION CORPS
CCD in full charge-coupled device SEMICONDUCTOR device in which
the individual semiconductor components are connected so that the elec-
trical charge at the output of one device provides the input to the next
device. Because they can store electrical charges, CCDs can be used as
memory devices, but they are slower than RAMs. CCDs are sensitive to
light, and are therefore used as the light-detecting components in video
and digital cameras and in optical scanners.
CD See CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT
CD See COMPACT DISC
CD-ROM in full compact disc read-only memory Type of com-
puter storage medium that is read optically (e.g., by a LASER). A CD-ROM
drive uses a low-power laser beam to read digitized (binary) data that have
been encoded onto an optical disc in the form of tiny pits, then feeds the
data to a computer for processing. Because it uses digital data, a CD-ROM
can store images and sound in addition to text and is thus used in video
and audio devices to store music, graphics, and movies (see COMPACT DISC).
Unlike
conventional magnetic-
storage
technologies
(e.g.,
DISKS), CD-ROM drives cannot write
information (that is, accept the input
of new data), hence the tag “read-
only.” Recordable compact discs
(called CD-R) must be written on a
CD-R recorder and can be played on
any CD-ROM drive.
CDC See CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
AND PREVENTION
CeauÃescu
See also WHITE CEDAR.
Cedar Breaks National Monument Preserve, southwestern Utah,
U.S. Established as a national monument in 1933, it consists of a vast
natural amphitheatre (10 sq mi [26 sq km]) eroded in a limestone escarp-
ment. Iron and manganese oxide impurities in the cliff produce an amaz-
ing variety of colours that change constantly.
Cedar Rapids City (pop., 2000: 120,758), eastern Iowa, U.S. Origi-
nally called Rapids City, it was settled in the 1830s next to rapids of the
CEDAR RIVER, a source of waterpower. With the coming of the railroads, it
developed as a grain and livestock market. Neighbouring Kingston was
annexed in 1870, and Kenwood Park in 1926. Its manufactures include
electronic equipment and farm machinery. It was the home of the artist
GRANT WOOD.
Cela (Trulock)
celiac
popularity for its lively account of his tumultuous life and its vivid pic-
ture of Renaissance Italy.
cello
cenotaph
362 I
Central America (cid:2) Central Pacific Railroad
Sea. It includes GUATEMALA, BELIZE, HONDURAS, EL SALVADOR, NICARAGUA,
Mexico: QUINTANA ROO, YUCATÁN, CAMPECHE, TABASCO, and CHIAPAS. Area:
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
SCYTHIAN ART.
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Principal intelligence and coun-
terintelligence agency of the U.S., established in 1947 as a successor to
the World War II-era OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES. The law limits its activi-
ties to foreign countries; it is prohibited from gathering intelligence on
U.S. soil, which is a responsibility of the FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION.
Officially a part of the U.S. Defense Department, it is responsible for pre-
paring analyses for the NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL. Its budget is kept secret.
Though intelligence gathering is its chief occupation, the CIA has also
been involved in many covert operations, including the expulsion of
MOHAMMAD MOSADDEQ from Iran (1953), the attempted BAY OF PIGS INVASION
of Cuba (1961), and support of the Nicaraguan CONTRAs in the 1980s.
central limit theorem In statistics, any of several fundamental theo-
rems in PROBABILITY. Originally known as the law of errors, in its classic
form it states that the sum of a set of independent RANDOM VARIABLES will
approach a NORMAL DISTRIBUTION regardless of the distribution of the indi-
vidual variables themselves, given certain general conditions. Further, the
mean (see MEAN, MEDIAN, AND MODE) of the normal distribution will coin-
cide with the (arithmetic) mean of the (statistical) means of each random
variable.
central nervous system See NERVOUS SYSTEM
Central Pacific Railroad U.S. railroad company founded in 1861 by
a group of California merchants including MARK HOPKINS and LELAND STAN-
central processing unit See CPU
Central Treaty Organization (CENTO) originally Middle East
Treaty Organization or Baghdad Pact Organization Mutual-
security organization, originally composed of Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Pakistan,
and Britain. It was formed in 1955, at the urging of the U.S. and Britain,
to counter the threat of Soviet expansion into the Middle East. CENTO
was never very effective. Iraq withdrew after its anti-Soviet monarchy was
overthrown in 1959. In that same year the U.S. became an associate
member, and CENTO’s headquarters were moved to Ankara, Tur. After
the fall of Mohammad Reza Shah PAHLAVI in 1979, Iran withdrew and
CENTO was dissolved.
Central Valley Spanish Valle Central
CELAIN, POTTER Y, STONEWARE, TERRA-COTTA.
Ceratium
CERN in full Organisation Européenne pour la Recherche
Nucléaire formerly Conseil Européen pour la Recherche
Cernunnos
Cétsamain See BELTANE
Cetshwayo
Chaeronea
Chajang Yulsa
early as the 7th century BC. It established colonies in Macedonia, Italy, and
Sicily and was a base for campaigns against Athens until 411 BC. ARISTOTLE
died in Chalcis in 322 BC. The city became part of Greece in 1830.
chalybite See SIDERITE
Chambal River
Chambers, (David) Whittaker orig. Jay Vivian Chambers (b.
Chambord
when England and France were at war, and he was taken prisoner. In 1632
the colony was restored to France, and in 1633 Champlain made his last
voyage to Quebec, where he lived until his death.
champlevé
Chang Chih-tung See ZHANG ZHIDONG
Chang Chü-cheng See ZHANG JUZHENG
Chang Jiang See YANGTZE RIVER
Chang Tao-Ling See ZHANG DAOLING
Chang Tsai See ZHANG ZAI
Chang Tso-lin See ZHANG ZUOLIN
Chang’an
chanson de geste
a pamphlet arguing that the divisions among abolitionists stemmed from
their disagreements over women’s rights.
Chapultepec
Charles, Ray orig. Ray Charles Robinson (b. Sept. 23, 1930,
Charles I Hungarian Karoly known as Charles Robert of Anjou
376 I
Charles III (cid:2) Charles X Gustav
Charles III known as Charles the Fat
Charles IV orig. Wenceslas known as Charles of Luxembourg
Charles VI known as Charles the Well-Beloved or Charles the
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Charles XIV John Swedish Karl Johan orig. Jean-Baptiste
Bernadotte (b. Jan. 26, 1763, Pau, France—d. March 8, 1844, Stock-
holm, Swed.) King of Sweden and Norway (1818–44). He became an
ardent supporter of the French Revolution and rose rapidly in the army
ranks to brigadier general (1794). Named marshal of France in 1804, he
supported NAPOLEON in several campaigns (1805–09) but subsequently
shifted his allegiance. In 1810 he was invited to become crown prince of
Sweden; taking the name of Charles John, he assumed control of the gov-
ernment. He helped defeat Napoleon at the Battle of LEIPZIG, then defeated
France’s ally Denmark, forcing that country to transfer Norway to the
Swedish crown. On the death of CHARLES XIII in 1818, Charles John became
king of Sweden and Norway. His foreign policy led to a long and favour-
able period of peace.
Charles Albert Italian Carlo Alberto (b. Oct. 2, 1798, Turin, Pied-
mont, French Republic—d. July 28, 1849, Oporto, Port.) King of
Sardinia-Piedmont (1831–49). A member of the house of SAVOY, he
ascended the throne after the death of Charles Felix in 1831. He mitigated
the harsh administration of his country and accelerated its economic and
social development. The spread of revolutionary ideas forced him to grant
a statute for representative government in 1848. After the election of PIUS
IX as pope and the Austrian occupation of Ferrara, he sought to lead the
liberation of Italy. He went to war against Austria in 1848 and again in
1849, but, after his defeat in the Battle of NOVARA, he abdicated in favor
of his son, VICTOR EMMANUEL II.
Charles Edward,
the Young Pretender orig. Charles
Edward Louis Philip Casimir Stuart known as Bonnie Prince
Charlie (b. Dec. 31, 1720, Rome—d. Jan. 31, 1788, Rome) Claimant to
the British throne. He was the son of the royal pretender JAMES EDWARD and
grandson of the exiled JAMES II of England. Seeking to regain the throne, in
1745 the “Young Pretender” landed in Scotland, where he raised an army
of 2,400 among the clans. After taking Edinburgh and routing the English
at Prestonpans, he crossed the English border and reached Derby, but a
lack of strong support from the JACOBITEs and the French forced his retreat
into Scotland. He was decisively defeated at the Battle of CULLODEN (1746)
and, aided by Flora Macdonald (1722–90) and disguised as her maid,
escaped to France. He wandered about Europe trying to revive his cause,
but his debauched behaviour alienated his friends. He settled in Italy in
1766. He later became romanticized in ballads and legends.
Charles Martel
the centre of U.S. gold production. In the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR it was the
site of a Confederate naval yard. Presidents ANDREW JACKSON and JAMES
POLK were born nearby and received their early schooling there. Its indus-
try includes textiles, machinery, and chemical production, and it is the
site of several institutions of higher education.
Charlotte orig. Charlotte Sophia of Mecklenburg-Strelitz (b.
May 19, 1744—d. Nov. 17, 1818) Queen consort of GEORGE III of England.
In 1761 she was selected unseen after the British king asked for a review
of all eligible German Protestant princesses. The marriage was a success,
and the couple had 15 children, including GEORGE IV. After the king was
declared insane (1811), Parliament turned to the future George IV, while
Charlotte was given custody of her husband.
Charlotte Amalie
membership. Born amid an economic depression, the movement rose to
national importance under the leadership of FEARGUS O’CONNOR. Parlia-
ment refused to take action on three Chartist petitions presented to it, and
the movement declined after 1848.
Chartres
RALTY and Kuiu islands on the east and the Chicagof and Baranof islands
on the west, it is 3–10 mi (5–16 km) wide. It forms part of the INSIDE PAS-
SAGE between Alaska and Washington state.
Chattahoochee River
Chavín de Huántar
chelate
tions. See also BIOLOGICAL WARFARE.
chemin de fer
Nationalist Party’s candidate, ending that party’s 55-year rule of Taiwan.
In 2004 Chen was narrowly reelected, the vote coming one day after he
and his running mate, Vice President Annette Lu (Lu Hsiu-lien), were shot
and slightly wounded while campaigning in Tainan.
Chenab
Chernov
Cheshire
Chetumal
Chi-lin See JILIN
ch’i-lin See QILIN
Chi-nan See JINAN
Chiang Ching-kuo or Jiang Jingguo
Chichén Itzá
chicken One of the most widely domesticated poultry species (Gallus
gallus), raised worldwide for its meat and eggs. Descended from the wild
red JUNGLE FOWL of India, chickens have been domesticated for at least 4,000
years. Not until the 19th century did chicken meat and eggs become mass-
production commodities. Modern high-volume poultry farms, with rows of
cages stacked indoors for control of heat, light, and humidity, began to pro-
liferate in Britain c. 1920 and in the U.S. after World War II (see FACTOR Y
FARMING). Females are raised for meat and eggs; immature males are cas-
trated to become meat birds called capons. See also PRAIRIE CHICKEN.
chickenpox or varicella
Childebert
Chiloé
Ch’in tomb (cid:2) China Sea
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
wan into two sections. The northern section is the East China Sea, or
Eastern Sea, which covers an area of some 290,000 sq mi (751,100 sq
km), has a maximum depth of 8,912 ft (2,717 m), and is enclosed by east-
ern China, South Korea, the Japanese island of KYUSHU, the RYUKYU ISLANDS,
and Taiwan. The southern section is the South China Sea, often called
simply the China Sea, which covers an area of 1,423,000 sq mi (3,685,000
sq km), has a maximum depth of about 16,000 ft (5,000 m), and is
enclosed by southeastern China, Taiwan, the Philippines, Borneo, and
mainland Southeast Asia.
chinchilla
person can recognize 3,000–4,000 characters. Efforts have been made to
reduce the number of characters and to simplify their form, though the
fact that they can be read by a speaker of any Chinese language and their
inextricable link with China’s 3,000-year-old culture makes abandonment
of the system unlikely. Chinese characters have also been adapted to write
Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese.
Ch’ing dynasty See QING DYNASTY
Chinggis Khan See GENGHIS KHAN
Ch’ing-hai See QINGHAI
Ch’ing-hai Hu See KOKO NOR
chinoiserie
chiropractic
Chlotar
choline
words of the Lutheran chorales were often Latin plainsong hymn texts
translated into the vernacular. The melodies were often borrowed from
secular song and therefore displayed great melodic and structural simplic-
ity. In modern times the chorale is considered to be a musical setting,
usually polyphonic (multivoiced), of a traditional religious text.
chord Grouping of three or more musical tones, especially as sounded
simultaneously. The tones C-E–G constitute a “C major chord,” or “C
major triad.” Chords may comprise any number of separate tones, and
may be highly dissonant (see CONSONANCE AND DISSONANCE). The term HAR-
MONY is often used loosely as a synonym.
chordate
400 I
Christchurch (cid:2) Christian Social Union
Christian IV, detail of an oil painting by
Pieter Isaacsz, 1612; in Frederiksborg
Castle, Denmark
COURTESY OF DET NATIONALHISTORISKE MUSEUM PÅ
FREDERIKSBORG, DEN.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Christian, Charlie orig. Charles Christian (b. July 29, 1916, Bon-
Christian Democratic Party (Italy) See ITALIAN POPULAR PARTY
Christian Democratic Union (CDU) German political party advo-
also KONRAD ADENAUER; CHRISTIAN DEMOCRACY.
Christian Science Monitor, The Daily newspaper of national and
international news and features, published Monday through Friday in Bos-
ton under the auspices of the Church of Christ, Scientist (see CHRISTIAN
SCIENCE). Established in 1908 at the urging of MAR Y BAKER EDDY as a pro-
test against the sensationalism of the popular press, it became one of the
most respected U.S. newspapers, famous for its thoughtful treatment of
the news and for the quality of its assessments of political, social, and
economic developments. It strictly limits the kinds of advertising it
accepts. It maintains its own bureaus to gather news abroad and publishes
a weekly world edition. The newspaper won its sixth Pulitzer Prize in
1996, in the category of international reporting.
Christian Social Union (CSU) Conservative German political party
that was founded in Bavaria, West Germany, in 1946 by Roman Catholic
Christine de Pisan or Chris-
tine de Pizan
and Protestant groups. It was committed to free enterprise, federalism,
and a united Europe that would operate under Christian principles. From
1946 it held the government of Bavaria continuously, except in 1954–57.
In national elections it usually cooperated with the CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATIC
UNION.
Christian socialism Social and political movement originating in
mid-19th-century Europe. Christian socialists attempted to combine the
fundamental aims of socialism with the religious and ethical convictions
of Christianity, promoting cooperation over competition as a means of
helping the poor. The term was coined in Britain in 1848 after the failure
of the reform movement known as CHARTISM. Christian socialism found
followers in France and Germany, though the German group, led by Adolf
Stoecker, combined its activities with violent ANTI-SEMITISM. Although the
movement died out in the U.S. in the early 20th century, it retains an
important following in Europe.
Christiania See OSLO
Christie, Dame Agatha (Mary Clarissa) (b. Sept. 15, 1890,
Christus
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE’s Henry VI.
chronometer
in 1945. After the war he commanded the Soviet occupation forces in
Germany (1949–53). He headed the Kiev military district (1953–60) and
thereafter held a variety of military assignments in Moscow.
chukar
Churchill, Sir Winston (Leonard Spencer) (b. Nov. 30, 1874,
ATLANTIC CHARTER and at the CAIRO, CASABLANCA, and TEHRAN conferences.
Churrigueresque
known species are in the family Cicadidae and are found in tropical
deserts, grasslands, and forests. Males produce loud noises by vibrating
membranes near the base of the abdomen. Most North American cicadas
produce rhythmical ticks, buzzes, or whines, though the “song” of some
species is musical. The species are easily distinguishable by song, behav-
iour, and appearance. Periodic cicadas (species that occur in large num-
bers in chronologically and geographically isolated broods) appear in
regular cycles, including the well-known 17-year cicada (often errone-
ously called the 17-year LOCUST) and 13-year cicada. The larvae (nymphs)
burrow into the ground, where they remain for 17 or 13 years, feeding
on juices sucked from roots; they then emerge in large numbers to live
aboveground as adults for a single week.
Cicero
Panhandle, southeastern Colorado, and southwestern Kansas, the river-
bed in this area is often dry and is known as the Dry Cimarron. The SANTA
FE TRAIL coursed along its valley for 100 mi (160 km), and travelers knew
the Oklahoma Panhandle as the “Cimarron Cutoff.”
Cimmerian
to light. The controlling mechanism for these cyclic processes within the
body is thought to be the HYPOTHALAMUS. Any change in the circadian cycle
(such as JET LAG and other conditions associated with travel) requires a cer-
tain period for readjustment.
Circassian
cirrhosis
ment and served the interests of the nation-state. The INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
further transformed city life, as factory cities blossomed rapidly in
England, northwestern Europe, and the northeastern U.S. By the mid-20th
century, 30–60% of a country’s population might be living in its major
urban centers. With the rise of the automobile came the growth of sub-
urbs and urban sprawl, as factories, offices, and residences erected in ear-
lier periods became aged and obsolete. Today many cities suffer from lack
of adequate housing, sanitation, recreational space, and transportation
facilities, and face problems of inner-city decay or burgeoning shanty-
towns. Local governments have sought
to alleviate these problems
through URBAN PLANNING.
Ciudad Guayana
nation caused many supporters to withdraw. In the succeeding decades,
leaders sought power through elective office and substantive economic
and educational gains through AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.
civil service Body of government officials employed in civil occupa-
tions that are neither political nor judicial. In well-ordered societies, they
are usually recruited and promoted on the basis of a merit-and-seniority
system, which may include examinations; elsewhere, corruption and
patronage are more important factors. They often serve as neutral advis-
ers to elected officials and political appointees. Though not responsible
for making policy, they are charged with its execution. The civil service
originated in the earliest known Middle Eastern societies; the modern
European civil services date to 17th- and 18th-century Prussia and the
electors of Brandenburg. In the U.S., senior officials change with each
new administration. In Europe, regulations were established in the 19th
century to minimize favouritism and to ensure a wide range of knowledge
and skills among civil service officers. See also CHINESE EXAMINATION SYS-
TEM; SPOILS SYSTEM.
Civil Service Act, Pendleton See PENDLETON CIVIL SERVICE ACT
Civil War See AMERICAN CIVIL WAR
Civil Wars, English See ENGLISH CIVIL WARS
Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) (1933–42) U.S. unemploy-
forms the basis of the legal systems of The Netherlands, Belgium, Lux-
embourg, Italy, Spain, most of France’s former possessions overseas, and
many Latin American countries. German civil law prevails in Austria,
Switzerland, the Scandinavian countries, and certain countries outside
Europe, such as Japan, that have westernized their legal systems. The term
is also used to distinguish the law that applies to private rights from the
law that applies to criminal matters. See also CRIMINAL LAW; TORT.
civil liberty Freedom from arbitrary interference in one’s pursuits by
individuals or by government. The term is usually used in the plural. Civil
liberties are protected explicitly in the constitutions of most democratic
countries. (In authoritarian countries, civil liberties are often formally
guaranteed in a constitution but ignored in practice.) In the U.S., civil
liberties are guaranteed by the BILL OF RIGHTS and the 13th, 14th, and 15th
Amendments to the CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. The Constitution’s
13th Amendment prohibits slavery and involuntary servitude; the 14th
bars the application of any law that would abridge the “privileges and
immunities” of U.S. citizens or deprive any person of “life, liberty, or
property…without DUE PROCESS of law” or deny any person EQUAL PROTEC-
TION under the law; and the 15th guarantees the right of all U.S. citizens
to vote. The related term CIVIL RIGHT is often used to refer to one or more
of these liberties or indirectly to the obligation of government to protect
certain classes of people from violations of one or more of their civil lib-
erties (e.g., the obligation to protect racial minorities from discrimination
on the basis of race). In the U.S., civil rights are protected by the CIVIL
RIGHTS ACT OF 1964 and subsequent legislation. See also AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION.
under Pres. LYNDON B. JOHNSON. See also CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT.
civil rights movement Movement for racial equality in the U.S. that,
through nonviolent protest, broke the pattern of racial segregation in the
South and achieved equal rights legislation for blacks. Following the U.S.
Supreme Court decision in BROWN V. BOARD OF EDUCATION OF TOPEKA (1954),
African American and white supporters attempted to end entrenched seg-
regationist practices. When ROSA PARKS was arrested in 1955 in Montgom-
ery, Ala., an African American boycott of the bus system was led by
MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR., and RALPH ABERNATHY. In the early 1960s the Stu-
dent Nonviolent Coordinating Committee led boycotts and sit-ins to
desegregate many public facilities. Using the nonviolent methods of
MOHANDAS K. GANDHI, the movement spread, forcing the desegregation of
department stores, supermarkets, libraries, and movie theatres. The Deep
South remained adamant in its opposition to most desegregation mea-
sures, often violently; protesters were attacked and occasionally killed.
Their efforts culminated in a march on Washington, D.C., in 1963 to sup-
port civil rights legislation. Following the assassination of JOHN F. KENNEDY,
Pres. LYNDON B. JOHNSON persuaded Congress to pass the CIVIL RIGHTS ACT
OF 1964, a victory that was followed by the VOTING RIGHTS ACT in 1965.
After 1965, militant groups such as the BLACK PANTHER PARTY split off from
the civil rights movement, and riots in black ghettos and King’s assassi-
Clair, René orig. René-Lucien Chomette (b. Nov. 11, 1898, Paris,
CLAM, GEODUCK, QUAHOG, and soft-shell
clam.
clan Kinship group based on actual
or purported DESCENT from a common
ancestor, as traced through the male (patriclan) or the female (matriclan)
line. Clans are normally exogamous, marriage within the clan being
regarded as INCEST. Clans may segment into subclans or lineages, and
genealogical records and myths may be altered to incorporate new mem-
bers who lack KINSHIP ties with the clan. Clan membership may be useful
in ensuring mutual support and defense as well as in the mediation of
disputes over property rights and the mode of residence after MARRIAGE.
Some clans express their unity by means of a common emblem. See also
EXOGAMY AND ENDOGAMY.
clapboard
Clark, Champ orig. James Beauchamp Clark (b. March 7, 1850,
near Lawrenceburg, Ky., U.S.—d. March 2, 1921, Washington, D.C.) U.S.
politician. Clark moved to Missouri in 1876 and settled at Bowling Green.
He was successively a newspaper editor, a prosecuting attorney, and a
state legislator; he was then elected to the U.S. House of Representatives,
where he served 13 terms (1893–95, 1897–1921). A follower of WILLIAM
JENNINGS BR YAN, he supported agrarian measures. As a member of the
House rules committee in 1910, he led the revolt against JOSEPH CANNON
and succeeded him as speaker (1911–19). At the 1912 Democratic Party
convention, Clark was a leading contender for the presidential nomina-
tion until Bryan switched his support to Woodrow Wilson.
Clark, Dick in full Richard Wagstaff Clark (b. Nov. 30, 1929,
Helen Clark, 2005.
SEAN GALLUP/GETTY IMAGES
clarinet (cid:2) class
1981 and served as its chairman 1982–94, building it into a billion-dollar
company that produced workstations for graphics-intensive applications.
In 1994 he cofounded Netscape Communications, whose graphical inter-
face Web browser revolutionized the Internet by making it easy to access
Internet documents.
Clark (of Saltwood), Kenneth (Mackenzie) Clark, Baron (b.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Claude Lorrain
(see THERMAE), AMPHITHEATERS, and TRIUMPHAL ARCHES. Classical architecture
Judaea a province. He encouraged
urbanization, spent lavishly on pub-
lic works, and extended Roman citi-
zenship
throughout
empire.
Having executed his scheming third
wife, Valeria Messalina, in 48, he
married his niece AGRIPPINA THE
YOUNGER. She pressured Claudius
into naming her son Lucius (later
NERO) heir instead of his own son
Britannicus. Claudius may have been
poisoned by Agrippina.
Claudius
Caecus
in 1901 by the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty, under which the British govern-
ment agreed to allow the U.S. to construct and control the canal.
Clazomenae
Clement of Alexandria, Saint Latin Titus Flavius Clemens (b.
Clemente
Clermont
Clinton, George (b. July 26, 1739, Little Britain, N.Y.—d. April 20,
1812, Washington, D.C., U.S.) U.S. politician, fourth vice president of
the U.S. (1805–12). A veteran of the French and Indian War, he was a
leading member of the New York assembly (1768–75) and a delegate to
the CONTINENTAL CONGRESS (1775). As governor of New York (1777–95,
1801–04), he was a forceful leader and able administrator; he led the
opposition to the state’s adoption of the U.S. Constitution. A supporter of
THOMAS JEFFERSON, he was twice elected vice president (with Jefferson and
JAMES MADISON); he died in office.
Clinton, Hillary Rodham orig. Hillary Diane Rodham (b. Oct.
cliometrics
Cline, Patsy orig. Virginia Patterson Hensley (b. Sept. 8, 1932,
Clinton, Bill in full William Jefferson Clinton orig. William
Clitunno River
Close
Cluj-Napoca
also HYDRA; PORTUGUESE MAN-OF-WAR; SEA ANEMONE.
Cnidus
cobia
cocaine HETEROCYCLIC COMPOUND (C17H21NO4), an ALKALOID obtained from
coccus
Cockpit Country Region, west-
Cocteau
diagnosis, codependency is a psychological syndrome noted in relatives
or partners of alcoholics or substance abusers.
codex Manuscript BOOK, especially of Scripture, early literature, or
ancient mythological or historical annals. The earliest type of manuscript
in the form of a modern book (i.e., a collection of pages stitched together
along one side), the codex replaced earlier rolls of papyrus and wax tab-
lets. Among its advantages, it could be opened at once to any point in the
text, it permitted writing on both sides of the leaf, and it could contain
long texts. The oldest extant Greek codex is the Codex Sinaiticus (4th
century AD), a biblical manuscript. Codices were developed separately by
pre-Columbian Mesoamericans after c. AD 1000.
Codium
discharged to the condenser, which would waste the remaining energy in
the steam. The steam at the higher pressure can provide large amounts of
lower-temperature energy for heating buildings or evaporating brine in a
chemical plant. Considerable overall energy savings can be obtained by
cogeneration. See also STEAM ENGINE.
cogito, ergo sum Latin “I think, therefore I am” Dictum coined
cognac
also CAISSON.
Cohan
Coleman, (Randolph Denard) Ornette (b. March 9, 1930, Fort
Coleraine
Colima
colloid
Colonial National Historical Park Historical reservation, south-
small islands. See also DECOLONIZATION, DEPENDENCY, IMPERIALISM.
colonnade Row of columns generally supporting an ENTABLATURE, used
either as an independent feature (e.g., a covered walkway) or as part of a
building (e.g., a PORTICO). The earliest colonnades appear in the temple
architecture of ancient Greece. In a BASILICA, colonnades are used to sepa-
rate the side aisles from the central space. See also STOA.
colony In antiquity, any of the new settlements established in territory
conquered by the Greeks (8th–6th century BC), ALEXANDER THE GREAT (4th
century BC), and the Romans (4th century BC–AD 2nd century). Greek
colonies extended to Italy, Sicily, Spain,
the eastern Mediterranean
(including Egypt), and the Black Sea. Alexander pushed even farther into
Central Asia, South Asia, and Egypt. Roman colonization covered much
of the same area and regions south to northern Africa, west to Spain, and
north to Britain and Germany. Reasons for colonizing included expansion
of trade, acquisition of raw materials, resolution of political unrest or
overpopulation, and craving for land and rewards. Colonies retained ties
and loyalty to Rome, though rebelliousness was not uncommon. In Roman
colonies after 177 BC, colonists retained Roman citizenship and could
exercise full political rights. Ancient colonization spread Hellenic and
Roman culture to the far reaches of the empires, often assimilating local
populations, some of whom acquired Roman citizenship.
colony In zoology, a group of organisms of one SPECIES that live and
interact closely with each other in an organized fashion. A colony differs
from an aggregation, in which the group has no cooperative or organized
function. Colonies of social insects (e.g., ants, bees) usually include CASTES
with different responsibilities. Many birds form temporary breeding colo-
nies, in some cases to stimulate reproductive activities, in others to make
the best use of a limited breeding habitat and to coordinate efforts in pro-
tecting nests from predators. Certain mammals that live in close groups
are said to be colonial, though they lack cooperative activities and each
maintains a territory.
Colophon
colostomy
COLUMNIATION, ORDER.
coma Complete lack of conscious-
ness, with loss of reaction to stimu-
lus and of spontaneous nervous activity. It is usually associated with
cerebral injury of metabolic or physical origin. Simple CONCUSSIONs cause
short losses of consciousness. Coma from lack of oxygen may last sev-
eral weeks and is often fatal. Coma caused by STROKE can be sudden, while
that caused by metabolic abnormalities (as in DIABETES MELLITUS) or cerebral
TUMOURs comes on gradually. Treatment depends on the cause.
Comana
Columbus, Christopher Italian Cristoforo Colombo Spanish
Cristóbal Colón (b. between Aug. 26 and Oct. 31?, 1451, Genoa—d.
May 20, 1506, Valladolid, Spain) Genoese navigator and explorer whose
transatlantic voyages opened the way for European exploration, exploi-
tation, and colonization of the Americas. He began his career as a young
seaman in the Portuguese merchant marine. In 1492 he obtained the spon-
sorship of the Spanish monarchs FERDINAND II and ISABELLA I for an attempt
to reach Asia by sailing westward over what was presumed to be open
Comaneci
SCHULZ. See also COMIC BOOK.
Cominform in full Communist Information Bureau Agency of
international communism founded under Soviet auspices in 1947. Its
original members were the Communist Parties of the Soviet Union, Bul-
garia, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Yugoslavia, France,
and Italy, but Yugoslavia was expelled in 1948. The Cominform’s activi-
ties consisted mainly of publishing propaganda to encourage international
communist solidarity. It was dissolved by Soviet initiative in 1956 as part
of a Soviet program of reconciliation with Yugoslavia.
Comintern or Communist International or Third Interna-
Comitia Centuriata
Commodus in full Caesar Marcus Aurelius Commodus
Antoninus Augustus
Lucius Aelius Aurelius Com-
orig.
modus (b. Aug. 31, 161, Lanu-
vium, Latium—d. Dec. 31, 192)
Roman emperor (AD 177–92). He
ruled with his father, MARCUS AURE-
LIUS, until the latter’s death in 180;
recalled from the frontier, Commo-
dus plunged into a life of dissipation
in Rome. After his sister tried to have
him killed (182), he executed the
senators involved and began ruling
capriciously. His brutality stirred
unrest that ended years of Roman
stability and prosperity. He renamed
Colonia
Commodiana
(“Colony of Commodus”). Physi-
cally impressive, he claimed he was
Hercules and performed as a gladia-
tor. His mistress and advisers had
him strangled, ending the Antonine
dynasty.
common cold See common COLD
common fox See RED FOX
common gallinule See MOORHEN
common law Body of law based on custom and general principles and
that, embodied in case law, serves as precedent or is applied to situations
not covered by statute. Under the common-law system, when a court
decides and reports its decision concerning a particular case, the case
becomes part of the body of law and can be used in later cases involving
similar matters. This use of precedents is known as STARE DECISIS. Common
law has been administered in the courts of England since the Middle Ages;
it is also found in the U.S. and in most of the British Commonwealth. It
is distinguished from CIVIL LAW.
common-law marriage Marriage that is without a civil or religious
ceremony and is based on the parties’ agreement to consider themselves
married and usually also on their cohabitation for a period of time. Most
jurisdictions no longer allow this type of marriage to be formed, though
they may recognize such marriages formed before a certain date or formed
in ajurisdiction that permits such marriages.
common-lead dating See URANIUM-THORIUM-LEAD DATING
Common Market See EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
Common Pleas, Court of English court of law founded in 1178 to
hear civil disputes. Under the MAGNA CARTA (1215), it attained jurisdic-
tion separate from the King’s (Queen’s) Court, though its decisions were
subject to review by the latter. Beginning in the 15th century, it competed
with the King’s (Queen’s) Court and the Court of EXCHEQUER for COMMON-
LAW business. By the 19th century, the complexity of overlapping juris-
dictional rules had become unbearable, and all three courts were replaced
(under the Judicature Act of 1873) by the Supreme Court of Judicature,
which remains the court of general jurisdiction in England and Wales.
Common Prayer, Book of See BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER
common rorqual See FIN WHALE
Commoner, Barry (b. May 28, 1917, Brooklyn, N.Y.) U.S. biologist
and educator. He studied at Harvard University and taught at Washington
University and Queens College. His warnings, since the 1950s, of the
environmental threats posed by modern technology (including nuclear
weapons, use of pesticides and other toxic chemicals, and ineffective
waste management) in such works as his classic Science and Survival
(1966) made him one of the foremost environmentalist spokesmen of his
time. He was a third-party candidate for U.S. president in 1980.
Commons, House of Popularly elected lower house of the bicameral
British PARLIAMENT. Passage of legislation is its primary function. Because
it alone has the power to levy taxes and allocate expenditures, it is Brit-
ain’s chief legislative authority. It originated in the late 13th century, when
landholders and other property owners began sending representatives to
Parliament to present grievances and petitions to the king and to accept
commitments to the payment of taxes. It was the less powerful house until
1911, when the Reform Bill of that year gave it the power to override the
HOUSE OF LORDS. The party with the greatest representation in the Com-
mons forms the government, and the PRIME MINISTER chooses the CABINET from
the party’s members. There are 646 members, elected from single-
member districts. See also Canadian PARLIAMENT; PARLIAMENTAR Y DEMOCRACY.
Commons, John R(ogers) (b. Oct. 13, 1862, Hollandsburg, Ohio,
U.S.—d. May 11, 1945, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.) U.S. economist. He taught
at the University of Wisconsin (1904–32) and published works such as A
Documentary History of American Industrial Society (10 vol., 1910–11)
and A History of Labor in the United States (4 vol., 1918–35), in which
he linked the evolution of the U.S. labour movement to changes in the
market structure. He drafted reform legislation for Wisconsin and worked
for the federal government in areas including civil service and worker’s
compensation.
commonwealth Body politic founded on law for the common “weal,”
or good. The term was often used by 17th-century writers to signify an
organized political community, its meaning thus being similar to the mod-
ern meaning of state or nation. Today it primarily refers to the COMMON-
WEALTH. Four U.S. states (Kentucky, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and
Virginia) call themselves commonwealths, a distinction in name only.
Puerto Rico has been a commonwealth rather than a state since 1952; its
residents, though U.S. citizens, have only a nonvoting representative in
Congress and pay no federal taxes.
Commonwealth or Commonwealth of Nations Free associa-
See also BRITISH EMPIRE.
Commonwealth Games Quadrennial sports competition for coun-
tries of the British Commonwealth. The inaugural meeting was called the
British Empire Games and was held in Hamilton, Ont., Can., in 1930.
The Games include athletics (TRACK AND FIELD), GYMNASTICS, BOWLS, and SWIM-
MING events for both men and women, and BOXING, CYCLING, SHOOTING, WEIGHT
LIFTING, and WRESTLING for men only. ROWING, BADMINTON, and FENCING have
also occasionally been included.
Commonwealth of Independent States Free association of sov-
ereign states formed in 1991, comprising Russia and 11 other republics
that were formerly part of the Soviet Union. Members are Russia,
Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Moldova. Its administra-
tive center is in Minsk, Belarus. The Commonwealth’s functions are to
coordinate its members’ policies regarding their economies, foreign rela-
tions, defense, immigration policies, environmental protection, and law
enforcement.
commune
gious principles; monastic life is essentially communal (see MONASTICISM).
B. F. SKINNER’s Walden Two (1948) inspired many American attempts at
communal living, especially in the late 1960s and early 1970s. See also
COLLECTIVE FARM, COMMUNITARIANISM, KIBBUTZ, MOSHAV.
commune
commutative law Two closely related laws of number operations. In
symbols, they are stated: a + b = b + a and ab = ba. Stated in words:
Quantities to be added or multiplied can be combined in any order. More
generally, if two procedures give the same result when carried out in arbi-
trary order, they are commutative. Exceptions occur (e.g., in vector mul-
tiplication). See also ASSOCIATIVE LAW, DISTRIBUTIVE LAW.
Commynes
THEOR Y).
complex variable In mathematics, a VARIABLE that can take on the value
of a COMPLEX NUMBER. In basic algebra, the variables x and y generally stand
for values of real numbers. The algebra of complex numbers (complex
analysis) uses the complex variable z to represent a number of the form
a + bi. The modulus of z is its ABSOLUTE VALUE. A complex variable may be
graphed as a VECTOR from the origin to the point (a,b) in a rectangular
COORDINATE SYSTEM, its modulus corresponding to the vector’s length. Called
an Argand diagram, this representation establishes a connection between
complex analysis and vector analysis. See also EULER’S FORMULA.
composite family Family Compositae, one of the largest plant fami-
lies (also known as Asteraceae, DAISY family, and ASTER family), which con-
tains more than 1,100 genera and almost 20,000 species of herbaceous
plants, shrubs, and trees, found throughout the world. Though diverse in
habit and habitat, composites tend to grow in sunlit places in temperate
and subtropical regions. The family includes many garden ornamentals,
including AGERATUMs, asters, CHR YSANTHEMUMs, COSMOS, DAHLIAs, MARIGOLDs,
and ZINNIAs. Some genera include weeds such as DANDELION, RAGWEED, and
THISTLE. ARTEMISIA, ARTICHOKE, ENDIVE, SAFFLOWER, SALSIFY, LETTUCE, and SUNFLOWER
chologists. See also DYSLEXIA; LATERALITY; PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING; SPEECH.
power and CONTROL SYSTEMS (see PNEUMATIC DEVICE).
Compromise of 1867 or Ausgleich
Compton effect Change in WAVELENGTH of X RAYS and other energetic
forms of ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION when they collide with ELECTRONS. It is
a principal way in which radiant energy is absorbed by matter, and is
caused by the transfer of energy from PHOTONS to electrons. When pho-
tons collide with electrons that are free or loosely bound in atoms, they
transfer some of their energy and momentum to the electrons, which then
recoil. New photons of less energy and momentum, and hence longer
wavelength, are produced; these scatter at various angles, depending on
the amount of energy lost to the recoiling electrons. The effect demon-
strates the nature of the photon as a true particle with both energy and
momentum. Its discovery in 1922 by ARTHUR COMPTON was essential to
establishing the WAVE-PARTICLE DUALITY of ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION.
computed axial tomography
444 I
computer-integrated manufacturing (cid:2) computer science
A typical personal computer system consists of the computer itself, a video monitor, a keyboard, a mouse, and speakers. Other peripheral devices may include a printer,
scanner, camera, microphone, or external storage device. Chips and circuit boards (“cards”) are plugged into the motherboard. Other components, such as disk drives,
are housed in the computer case and controlled by a card called a controller. The microprocessor directs the computer’s activity via the motherboard and processes data
with its millions of transistors. Data and programs in use are stored in the RAM chips. The floppy and hard drives store data not in immediate use on magnetic disks. Opti-
cal disks, such as CD-ROMs and DVDs, may store data as well. Some circuit boards are dedicated to specific functions; the sound card, for example, generates sounds and
music. Additional boards, such as a modem, may be added by inserting them into an expansion slot, a row of electrical connectors into which the board is plugged. The
mouse is an input device used to position a pointer on the computer’s screen. On-screen selections are made by “clicking” one of the mouse’s buttons, sending a signal to
the computer.
© ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
cal systems. See also COMPUTER ANIMATION; COMPUTER ART.
computer-integrated manufacturing Data-driven AUTOMATION
by computers before the system is built in an attempt to eliminate wast-
age. See also ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, EXPERT SYSTEMS, ROBOTICS.
computer network See computer NETWORK
computer printer See computer PRINTER
computer program See computer PROGRAM
computer science Study of computers, their design (see COMPUTER
ARCHITECTURE), and their uses for computation, DATA PROCESSING, and systems
control, including design and development of computer HARDWARE and
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
OGNITION.
computing, quantum See QUANTUM COMPUTING
Comstock, Anthony (b. March 7, 1844, New Canaan, Conn.,
U.S.—d. Sept. 21, 1915, New York, N.Y.) U.S. social reformer. He was
an early agitator against abortion and pornography, lobbying successfully
for the enactment (1873) of a severe federal statute outlawing the trans-
portation of obscene matter in the mails (the Comstock Law). In that same
year, he founded the Society for the Suppression of Vice, which he
directed until his death. As a special agent of the U.S. Post Office (1873–
1915), he conducted spectacular raids on publishers and vendors. His
books include Traps for the Young (1883) and Morals Versus Art (1888).
Comte
those of AIX-LA-CHAPELLE, TROPPAU, LAIBACH, and VERONA.
concerto
and increase strength. See also PRECAST CONCRETE, PRESTRESSED CONCRETE, REIN-
FORCED CONCRETE.
concubinage
including FELIX MENDELSSOHN, HECTOR BERLIOZ, and RICHARD WAGNER, were
composers themselves. By the end of the 19th century, conducting had
become a specialty and the great conductors had become celebrities in
their own right.
conduction See THERMAL CONDUCTION
cone or strobilus
CHOS©N DYNASTY and in Japan during the TOKUGAWA PERIOD.
Confucius Chinese Kongfuzi or K’ung-fu-tzu
Congo, Republic of the known as Congo (Brazzaville) formerly
Middle Congo Republic, west-central Africa. Area: 132,047 sq mi
(342,000 sq km). Population (2005 est.): 3,602,000. Capital: BRAZZAVILLE.
Congo River or Zaire
Conkling, Roscoe (b. Oct. 30, 1829, Albany, N.Y., U.S.—d. April 18,
1888, New York, N.Y.) U.S. politician. He was a lawyer, orator, and leader
of the WHIG PARTY. He served in the U.S. House of Representatives (1859–
65) and Senate (1867–81). As a leader of the RADICAL REPUBLICANs, he sup-
ported severe RECONSTRUCTION measures. Resisting efforts by Pres.
RUTHERFORD B. HAYES to achieve civil service reform, he retained control of
New York state’s patronage system. At the 1880 Republican convention,
he led the Stalwart faction in supporting former Pres. ULYSSES S. GRANT.
In 1881 he resigned from the Senate in a patronage dispute with Pres.
JAMES GARFIELD.
Connacht or Connaught
MANNERS with his brilliant comic dialogue, satirical portrayal of fashion-
able society, uproarious bawdiness, and ironic scrutiny of the affectations
of his age. See also RESTORATION LITERATURE.
ERING PLANT).
Connolly, Maureen (Catherine) (b. Sept. 17, 1934, San Diego,
Connor, Ralph orig. Charles William Gordon (b. Sept. 13, 1860,
Indian Lands, Glengarry county, Ont., Can.—d. Oct. 31, 1937, Winnipeg,
Man.) Canadian novelist. Ordained a Presbyterian minister in 1890, Con-
nor became a missionary to mining and lumber camps in the Canadian
Rocky Mountains; this experience and memories of his childhood in Glen-
garry, Ont., provided material for his novels, including The Sky Pilot
(1899) and The Prospector (1904), which, combining adventure with reli-
gious messages and wholesome sentiment, made him the best-selling
Canadian novelist of the early 20th century. His best books are considered
to be The Man from Glengarry (1901) and Glengarry School Days (1902).
Connors, Jimmy in full James Scott Connors (b. Sept. 2, 1952,
conodont
Conservative Party (Canada) See PROGRESSIVE CONSERVATIVE PARTY
OF CANADA
Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers
sory military service by all able-bodied men between certain ages, though
a few countries—notably Israel—have also drafted women.) In the 19th
century Prussia’s system of building up a large standing army through
conscription became the model for competing European powers. During
the American Civil War both the federal government and the Confederacy
instituted a draft, but the U.S. did not use it again until entering World
War I in 1917. Like the U.S., Britain abandoned conscription at the end
of World War I but reverted to it when World War II threatened. During
the ensuing Cold War, Britain retained the draft until 1960 and the U.S.
until 1973. See also U.S. ARMY.
consequentialism In ETHICS, the doctrine that actions should be judged
right or wrong on the basis of their consequences. The simplest form of
consequentialism is classical (or hedonistic) UTILITARIANISM, which asserts
that an action is right or wrong according to whether it maximizes the net
balance of pleasure over pain in the universe. The consequentialism of
G.E. MOORE, known as “ideal utilitarianism,” recognizes beauty and
friendship, as well as pleasure, as intrinsic goods that one’s actions should
aim to maximize. According to the “preference utilitarianism” of R.M.
Hare (1919–2002), actions are right if they maximize the satisfaction of
preferences or desires, no matter what the preferences may be for. Con-
sequentialists also differ over whether each individual action should be
judged on the basis ofits consequences or whether instead general rules
of conduct should be judged in this way and individual actions judged
only by whether they accord with a general rule. The former group are
known as “act-utilitarians” and the latter as “rule-utilitarians.” See also
DEONTOLOGICAL ETHICS.
conservation law or law of conservation In physics, the prin-
PARTY, the German CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATIC UNION, the U.S. REPUBLICAN PARTY,
and the Japanese LIBERAL-DEMOCRATIC PARTY. See also CHRISTIAN DEMOCRACY;
LIBERALISM.
Conservative Judaism Form of Judaism that mediates between
REFORM JUDAISM and ORTHODOX JUDAISM. Founded in 19th-century Germany
as the Historical School, it arose among German-Jewish theologians who
advocated change but found Reform positions extreme. They accepted the
Reform emphasis on critical scholarship, but wished to maintain a stricter
observance of Jewish law (e.g., dietary laws) and continued belief in the
coming of the MESSIAH. In 1886, rabbis of this centrist persuasion founded
the Jewish Theological Seminary of America (New York), leading to the
development of Conservative Judaism as a religious movement.
Constance (b. 1154—d. Nov. 27, 1198, Palermo) Queen of Sicily
(1194–98) and Holy Roman empress-consort (1191–97). The daughter of
King ROGER II of Sicily, she married the future emperor HENR Y VI in 1186
and was later crowned with him in Rome. Her marriage gave the HOHEN-
STAUFEN DYNASTY a claim to the Sicilian throne, which she asserted against
the opposition of her nephew TANCRED. When Henry died (1197), she
secured the protection of Pope INNOCENT III and had her son FREDERICK II
crowned king in 1198.
Constance, Council of (1414–18) 16th ecumenical council of the
Roman Catholic church. It was convened at the request of Emperor
SIGISMUND to deal with three competing popes, examine the writings of
JAN HUS and JOHN WYCLIFFE, and reform the Church. National political
rivalries divided the Council of Constance. Two of the three contending
popes were deposed; the third abdicated, and in 1417 the council selected
a new pope, Martin V. The Council condemned propositions of Hus and
Wycliffe, and Hus was burned at the stake by secular authorities.
Constance, Lake German Bodensee
Constantine V Copronymus
456 I
Constitution of 1795 (cid:2) consumer credit
Constitution of 1795 (Year III) French constitution established dur-
ing the THERMIDORIAN REACTION in the FRENCH REVOLUTION. Known as the Con-
Constitution of the Third Republic See CONSTITUTIONAL LAWS OF
Constitution of the United States Fundamental law of the U.S.
See also CIVIL LIBERTY; COMMERCE CLAUSE; EQUAL RIGHTS AMENDMENT; ESTABLISHMENT
CLAUSE; FREEDOM OF SPEECH; JUDICIAR Y; STATES’ RIGHTS.
Constitution of the Year VIII (1799) French constitution established
after the Coup of 18–19 BRUMAIRE during the FRENCH REVOLUTION. Drafted by
EMMANUEL JOSEPH SIEYES, it disguised the true character of the military dic-
tatorship created by NAPOLEON, reassuring the partisans of the Revolution
by proclaiming the irrevocability of the sale of national property and by
upholding the legislation against the ÉMIGRÉ NOBILITY. It created the regime
known as the CONSULATE, which concentrated all real power in the hands
of Napoleon. Submitted to a plebiscite, it won overwhelmingly in 1800.
Constitutional Act or Canada Bill (1791) British law repealing
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Constitutional Democratic Party or Kadet Russian political
DUCER GOODS.
CONSUMERISM, RALPH NADER.
consumer goods (cid:2) Continental Congress
Economists use statistical information on income and purchases to trace
trends in consumption, seeking to map consumer demand for goods and
services. In CLASSICAL ECONOMICS, consumers are assumed to be rational and
to allocate expenditures in such a way as to maximize total satisfaction
from all purchases. Incomes and PRICEs are seen as consumption’s two
major determinants. Critics of the model point out that there are many
exceptions to rational consumer behaviour—for example, the phenom-
enon of conspicuous consumption, in which the high price of a product
increases its prestige and adds to demand.
consumption See TUBERCULOSIS
consumption tax Levy such as an excise tax, a SALES TAX, or a TARIFF
paid directly or indirectly by the consumer. Consumption taxes fall more
heavily on lower-income than on upper-income groups because people
with less money consume a larger proportion of their income than those
with more money. See also PROGRESSIVE TAX, REGRESSIVE TAX.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
458 I
Continental Divide (cid:2) continuity principle
The theory of continental drift is based on the concept that the continental and oce-
anic crusts are embedded in the uppermost layer of the rocky lithosphere. The lithos-
phere is divided into sections called tectonic plates, which slide over an underlying
partly molten layer of rock called the asthenosphere. New lithosphere is created at
diverging plate margins (e.g., midocean ridges), and old lithosphere is consumed at
converging margins (e.g., subduction zones). The continents passively “drift” along
with the moving plates, and over hundreds of millions of years this movement alters
the entire geography of the Earth.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
Continental philosophy Collective term for the many distinct
philospohical traditions, methods, and styles that predominated on the
European continent (particularly in France and Germany) from the time
of IMMANUEL KANT. It is usually understood in contrast with ANALYTIC PHILOSO-
PHY, also called Anglo-American philosophy. In the 20th century it encom-
passed schools such as PHENOMENOLOGY, EXISTENTIALISM, structuralism, and
DECONSTRUCTION and thinkers such as MARTIN HEIDEGGER, JEAN-PAUL SARTRE,
MAURICE MERLEAU-PONTY, MICHEL FOUCAULT, and JACQUES DERRIDA. See also
STRUCTURALISM; POSTSTRUCTURALISM.
continental shelf Broad, relatively shallow submarine platform that
forms a border to a continent, typically extending from the coast to depths
of 330–660 ft (100–200 m). Continental shelves average about 40 mi (65
km) in width. Almost everywhere they are simply a continuation of the
continental landmass: narrow, rough, and steep off mountainous coasts
but broad and comparatively level offshore from plains. Continental
shelves are usually covered with a layer of sand, silts, and silty muds.
Their surfaces feature small hills and ridges that alternate with shallow
depressions and valley-like troughs. In a few cases, steep-walled V-shaped
submarine canyons cut deeply into both the shelf and the slope below.
See illustration above.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
The broad, gentle pitch of the continental shelf gives way to the relatively steep con-
tinental slope. The more gradual transition to the abyssal plain is a sediment-filled
region called the continental rise. The continental shelf, slope, and rise are collec-
tively called the continental margin. Depth is exaggerated here for effect.
© ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
continental shield Any of the large stable areas of low relief (little
variation in elevations) in the Earth’s CRUST that are composed of PRECAM-
BRIAN crystalline rocks. These rocks are always more than 570 million
years old, and some are as old as 2–3 billion years. Continental shields
occur on each of the continents.
continental slope Seaward border of a CONTINENTAL SHELF. The world’s
combined continental slope is about 200,000 mi (300,000 km) long and
descends at an average angle of about 4° from the edge of the continen-
tal shelf to the beginning of the ocean basins at depths of 330–10,500 ft
(100–3,200 m). The slope is most gradual off stable coasts without major
rivers and is steepest off coasts with young mountain ranges and narrow
continental shelves. Slopes off mountainous coastlines and narrow shelves
commonly have outcrops of rock. The dominant sediments of continen-
tal slopes are muds; there are smaller amounts of sediments of sand or
gravel.
Continental System In the NAPOLEONIC WARS, the blockade designed
by NAPOLEON to paralyze Britain through the destruction of British com-
merce. In the Decrees of Berlin (1806) and MILAN (1807), France pro-
claimed that neutrals and French allies were not to trade with the British.
The United Kingdom responded with a counterblockade, which led indi-
rectly to the WAR OF 1812. Because of Britain’s naval superiority, the
effort to enforce the system proved disastrous for Napoleon.
continuing education or adult education Any form of learning
continuity principle or continuity equation Principle of FLUID
Contreras
SOMOZA FAMILY). The U.S. CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY played a key role in
included a high incidence of PELVIC INFLAMMATOR Y DISEASE, ECTOPIC PREGNANCY,
contralto See ALTO
460 I
conveyor belt (cid:2) Coolidge
of the uterus.) Disorders with symptoms similar to those of conversion
disorder include factitious disorder, DISSOCIATIVE IDENTITY DISORDER, and PER-
SONALITY DISORDER (histrionic type).
conveyor belt One of various devices that provide mechanized move-
ment of material, as in a FACTOR Y. Conveyor belts are used in industrial
applications and also on large farms, in warehousing and freight-handling,
and in movement of raw materials. Belt conveyors of fabric, rubber, plas-
tic, leather, or metal are driven by a power-operated roll mounted under-
neath or at one end of the conveyor. The belt forms a continuous loop and
is supported either on rollers (for heavy loads) or on a metal slider pan
(if loads are light enough to prevent frictional drag on the belt). Motors
operating through constant- or variable-speed reduction gears usually pro-
vide the power.
convolvulus See BINDWEED
Cook, Mt. See MOUNT COOK NATIONAL PARK
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
tion by calling out the state guard
during the BOSTON POLICE STRIKE in
ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
Calvin Coolidge.
CONDITIONING, HEAT EXCHANGER.
Coomassie See KUMASI
coon cat See MAINE COON CAT
Cooper, Alfred Duff, 1st Viscount Norwich of Aldwick (b.
Cooper, Gary orig. Frank James Cooper (b. May 7, 1901, Hel-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Coolidge (cid:2) coordinate system I
Co-operative Commonwealth Federation Political party
prominent in western Canada in the 1930s and ’40s. It was founded in
Calgary, Alta., in 1932 by a federation of farm, labour, and socialist par-
ties to transform the capitalist system into a “cooperative commonwealth”
by democratic means. It called for the socialization of banks and public
ownership of transportation, communication, and natural resources. It
won the general election in Saskatchewan in 1944 and took over the pro-
vincial government. It won further Saskatchewan elections but declined
elsewhere. In 1961 it merged with the NEW DEMOCRATIC PARTY.
coordinate geometry See ANALYTIC GEOMETR Y
coordinate system Arrangement of reference lines or curves used to
identify the location of points in space. In two dimensions, the most com-
mon system is the Cartesian (after RENÉ DESCARTES) system. Points are des-
ignated by their distance along a horizontal (x) and vertical (y) axis from
a reference point, the origin, designated (0, 0). Cartesian coordinates also
can be used for three (or more) dimensions. A polar coordinate system
locates a point by its direction relative to a reference direction and its
distance from a given point, also the origin. Such a system is used in radar
or sonar tracking and is the basis of bearing-and-range navigation sys-
tems. In three dimensions, it leads to cylindrical and spherical coordinates.
coordinate system, spherical See SPHERICAL COORDINATE SYSTEM
print until he was on his deathbed. By attributing to Earth a daily rota-
tion around its own axis and a yearly revolution around a stationary Sun,
he developed an idea that had far-reaching implications for the rise of
modern science. He asserted, in contrast to Platonic instrumentalism, that
astronomy must describe the real, physical system of the world. Only with
JOHANNES KEPLER was Copernicus’s model fully transformed into a new
philosophy about the fundamental structure of the universe.
copier See PHOTOCOPIER
Copland
ters such as an idea, process, or system. Protection in the U.S. now extends
for the life of the creator plus 70 years after his or her death. Works made
for hire are now protected for a maximum of 95 years from the date of
publication or 120 years from the date of the creation of the work. In
1988 the U.S. joined the BERN CONVENTION, an agreement that governs
international copyright. The Digital Millennium Copyright Act, adopted
in the U.S. in 1998, expanded owners’ control over digital forms of their
creations and penalized persons who sought to evade technological shields
(such as encryption) for copyrighted material. See also INTELLECTUAL PROP-
ERTY; PATENT; TRADEMARK.
coquina
Cordobés
cormorant
cornflower See BACHELOR’S BUTTON
Cornplanter or John O’Bail (b. c. 1732, New York?—d. Feb. 18,
1836, Warren county, Pa., U.S.) American Indian leader. Born to a white
trader and a Seneca mother, he fought alongside the British in the Ameri-
can Revolution, leading attacks on white settlements in western New York
and Pennsylvania. He later helped negotiate treaties that ceded large tracts
of Indian land to the U.S. He earned the enmity of his tribe after advo-
cating Indian nonresistance to white expansion and accepting a land grant
from Pennsylvania.
Cornwall Administrative (pop., 2001: 501,267, including the Isles of
SCILLY) and historic county, southwestern England. Located on a peninsula
jutting into the Atlantic Ocean and terminating in LAND’S END, it is the most
remote of English counties; its county seat is TRURO. Southern Cornwall
is a popular tourist area; much of the coast is now protected by the
National Trust. Tin, mined in Cornwall for at least 3,000 years, attracted
prehistoric settlers, and there are stone relics in the area. Since 1337 the
manors of Cornwall have belonged to the English sovereign’s eldest son,
who acts as duke of Cornwall.
Cornwallis, Charles Cornwallis, 1st Marquess and 2nd
Earl (b. Dec. 31, 1738, London,
Eng.—d. Oct. 5, 1805, Ghazipur,
India) British soldier and statesman.
In 1780, during the AMERICAN REVOLU-
TION, he was appointed British com-
mander in the American South. He
defeated HORATIO GATES at Camden,
S.C., then marched into Virginia and
encamped at Yorktown (see Siege of
YORKTOWN). Trapped and besieged
there, he was forced to surrender his
army (1781), a defeat that effectively
ended military operations in the war.
Despite his defeat, he
retained
esteem in England. As governor-
general of India (1786–93, 1805), he
introduced legal and administrative
reforms; the Cornwallis Code (1793)
established a tradition of incorrupt-
ible British civil servants. In the third
Mysore War he defeated Tippu Sul-
tan in 1792. As viceroy of Ireland
(1798–1801), he supported the parliamentary union of Britain and Ireland.
He negotiated the Anglo-French TREATY OF AMIENS in 1802. Reappointed
governor-general of India in 1805, he died shortly after his arrival there.
corona
BUSINESS FINANCE.
taxes. See also CAPITAL GAINS TAX; INCOME TAX.
MULTINATIONAL CORPORATION.
Corporation for Public Broadcasting See PBS
Correggio
Corsica
Cosimo, Piero di See PIERO DI COSIMO
Cosimo the Elder See Cosimo de’ MEDICI
cosine See TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTION
Cosmati
America. Area: 19,730 sq mi (51,100 sq km). Population (2005 est.):
4,221,000. Capital: SAN JOSÉ. Most of the people are of Spanish ancestry
Costa-Gavras
Cotonou
count or earl European title of nobility, ranking in modern times
directly below a MARQUESS or (in countries without marquesses) a DUKE. In
England the title of earl is the equivalent of count and ranks above a VIS-
COUNT. The wife of a count or earl is a countess. The Roman comes
(“count”) was originally a household companion of the emperor; under
the Franks he was a local commander and judge. The counts were later
incorporated into the feudal structure, some becoming subordinate to
dukes, though a few countships were as great as duchies. As royal author-
ity was reasserted over the feudatories, which took place at different times
in the different kingdoms, the counts lost their political authority, though
they retained their privileges as members of the nobility.
Counter-Reformation or Catholic Reformation In ROMAN
NERI, JOHN OF THE CROSS, TERESA OF ÁVILA, FRANCIS DE SALES, and VINCENT DE
country dance or contredanse
courante
Cousteau
BEANS.
Cowper
through the continental U.S. and Mexico to Central America. It weighs
about 20–50 lbs (9–23 kg) and is about 3–4 ft (1–1.3 m) long, including
its 12–16-in. (30–40-cm) tail. Its coarse fur is generally buff above and
whitish below; its legs are reddish, and its tail is bushy and black-tipped.
The coyote feeds mainly on small mammals such as rodents, rabbits, and
hares but can also take down deer, sometimes doing so in packs. Vegeta-
tion and carrion are commonly eaten as well. Though persecuted by
humans because of its potential (generally overstated) to prey on domes-
tic or game animals, it has adapted well to human-dominated environ-
ments, including urban areas. A coyote-dog cross is called a coydog.
coypu See NUTRIA
Coysevox
Cranach
crannog
(see BATTERSEA ENAMELWARE) were com-
patible with his cream-glazed prod-
ucts. By 1790 many other factories
(e.g., Liverpool, Bristol, Stafford-
shire) were producing creamware
with success; continental imitations
were generally inferior. Creamware
was continually made throughout the
19th century and later.
creation myth or cosmogony
the material, and the DEFORMATION over a period of time (creep strain) under
constant load is measured, usually with an extensometer or STRAIN GAUGE.
Time to failure is also measured against stress. Once creep strain versus
time is plotted, various mathematical techniques are available for extrapo-
lating creep behaviour beyond the test times; thus, designers can use
thousand-hour test data, for example, to predict ten-thousand-hour behav-
iour. See also TESTING MACHINE.
creosote
creditor See DEBTOR AND CREDITOR
include the THIRTEEN PRINCIPLES OF FAITH. In CHRISTIANITY the NICENE CREED was
Creston, Paul orig. Giuseppe Guttoveggio (b. Oct. 10, 1906,
New York, N.Y., U.S.—d. Aug. 24, 1985, San Diego, Calif.) U.S. com-
poser. Born to a poor immigrant family, he was largely self-taught in
music. His numerous works, many of which achieved wide performance,
are highly rhythmical and tonally accessible. They include six sympho-
nies, a Requiem and three masses, and several concertos. He is noted for
the rhythmic vitality and full harmonies of his music, which is marked
by modern dissonances and polyrhythms.
Cretaceous
Crispi
Croce
throw the government. It subsequently lost prestige and was dissolved by
the Popular Front government in 1936.
Cro-Magnon
cordage and textiles (e.g., cotton, hemp); oil crops, for consumption or
industrial uses (e.g., cottonseed, corn); ornamental crops, for landscape
gardening (e.g., dogwood, azalea); and industrial and secondary crops,
for various personal and industrial uses (e.g., rubber, tobacco).
crop duster Usually, an aircraft used for dusting or spraying large
acreages with PESTICIDES, though other types of dusters are also employed.
Aerial spraying and dusting permit prompt coverage of large areas at the
moment when application of pesticide is most effective and avoid the need
for wheeled vehicles that might damage crops. The technique was greatly
improved in the 1960s with the development of ultra-low-volume appli-
cators, in which concentrated pesticides are distributed in extremely small
amounts. See also SPRAYING AND DUSTING.
croquet
croton
crustacean
Cruise, Tom orig. Thomas
Cruise Mapother IV (b. July 3,
Crusade, Children’s See CHILDREN’S CRUSADE
Crusade, Stedinger See STEDINGER CRUSADE
cryogenics
Ctesibius
but by Nature.” See also INTUITIONISM; VOLUNTARISM.
Cuéllar, Javier Pérez de See Javier PEREZ DE CUELLAR
Cuernavaca
Cumae
Cultivation System or Culture System Revenue system in the
ety. See also CULTURE CONTACT; SOCIOCULTURAL EVOLUTION.
culture, pure See PURE CULTURE
Cumbria alternated between Scottish and English rule until it was taken
by the English in 1157. Lead, silver, and iron ore have been mined in the
district since the 12th century.
cumin
Curaçao
496 I
curling (cid:2) Curtis Institute of Music
curling Game in which two teams of four players each slide a round
stone by means of a gooseneck handle on the top over a 138-ft (42-m)
stretch of ice toward a target circle. The object is to deliver the stone clos-
est to the centre (called the house). Each player delivers two stones, which
average 40 lbs (18.1 kg) apiece, often applying a curl to the stone’s tra-
jectory. The player’s teammates use a broom to sweep the ice ahead of
the oncoming stone in order to facilitate a longer slide or to adjust the arc
of the curl. Blocking and knocking out an opponent’s stones are impor-
tant strategies of the sport. Curling originated in Scotland in the early 16th
century. World championships have been held since 1959 and are usually
dominated by Canadians and Scandinavians. In 1998 curling became a
medal sport in the Winter Olympic Games.
The British women’s curling team competing in the final match at the 2002 Winter
Olympics in Salt Lake City, Utah.
ROBERTO SCHMIDT—AFP/GETTY IMAGES
WALTER CHANDOHA
Currant (Ribes)
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Currier and Ives partnership of Nathaniel Currier and James
Curtis, Cyrus (Herman Kotzschmar) (b. June 18, 1850, Portland,
wife of the editor EDWARD BOK, and named for her father, the inventor
CHARLES GORDON CURTIS. Her endowment was adequate to assure scholar-
ships for gifted students throughout the world. Many eminent musicians
have served on its faculty, including WANDA LANDOWSKA, BOHUSLAV MAR-
TIN,, and RUDOLF SERKIN. Graduates include SAMUEL BARBER, LEONARD BERNSTEIN,
and GIAN CARLO MENOTTI.
Curtiz
also CULTURE; FOLKLORE; MYTH; TABOO.
customs duty See TARIFF
customs union Trade agreement by which a group of countries charges
a common set of TARIFFs to the rest of the world while allowing free trade
among themselves. It is a partial form of economic integration, interme-
diate between free-trade zones, which allow mutual FREE TRADE but lack a
common tariff system, and common markets, which both utilize common
tariffs and allow free movement of resources including capital and labour
between members. Well-known customs unions include the Zollverein, a
19th-century organization formed by several German states under Prus-
sian leadership, and the EUROPEAN UNION, which passed through a customs-
union stage on the path to fuller economic integration. See also European
Community; GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE; NORTH AMERICAN FREE
TRADE AGREEMENT; WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION.
Custoza
atmosphere. The Italianate style favoured in Utrecht, one of Holland’s
artistic centres, is evident in his work. Many of his surviving paintings
are signed but few are dated.
Cuyuni
there were three Cyclopes (Arges, Brontes, and Steropes) who forged
thunderbolts for ZEUS. In a later tradition, they were assistants to HEPHAES-
TUS in this task. Apollo destroyed them after one of their thunderbolts
killed ASCLEPIUS.
cyclotron
Cypselus
Moravian Corridor, separates the Bohemian Massif from the CARPATHIAN
MOUNTAINS. Woodlands are a characteristic feature of the Czech landscape;
most regions have a moderate oceanic climate. The economy has been
privatized since the collapse of communism and is now largely market-
oriented. The Czech Republic is a multiparty republic with two legisla-
tive houses; its chief of state is the president, and the head of government
is the prime minister. Until 1918 its history was largely that of BOHEMIA.
In that year the independent republic of Czechoslovakia was born through
the union of Bohemia and MORAVIA with SLOVAKIA. Czechoslovakia came
under the domination of the Soviet Union after World War II, and from
1948 to 1989 it was ruled by a communist government. Its growing politi-
cal liberalization was suppressed by a Soviet invasion in 1968 (see PRA-
GUE SPRING). After communist rule collapsed in 1989–90, separatist
sentiments emerged among the Slovaks, and in 1992 the Czechs and Slo-
vaks agreed to break up their federated state. At midnight on Dec. 31,
1992, Czechoslovakia was peacefully dissolved and replaced by two new
countries, the Czech Republic and Slovakia, with the region of Moravia
remaining in the former. In 1999 the Czech Republic joined NATO, and
in 2004 it became a member of the European Union.
Czerny
tenths of
the population; Slovaks and
Moravians are the largest minorities. Lan-
guage: Czech (official). Religion: Chris-
tianity (predominantly Roman Catholic,
also other Christians, Protestant). Cur-
rency: koruna. The landlocked country is dominated by the Bohemian
Massif, a ring of mountains rising to 5,256 ft (1,602 m) at Mount Snezka
to encircle the Bohemian Plateau. The MORAVA RIVER valley, known as the
da Gama, Vasco See Vasco da GAMA
Da Ponte
Daidalic sculpture See DAEDALIC
SCULPTURE
Daigak Guksa
a modern communication and trans-
portation system and instituted social
reforms. He left India in 1856, but
his controversial policy of annex-
ation was considered a contributing
factor to the INDIAN MUTINY (1857).
Dalhousie University Privately
endowed university in Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada. It was founded in
1818 as Dalhousie College by the 9th
earl of Dalhousie,
then lieutenant
governor of Nova Scotia,
became a university in 1863. It is
organized into faculties of arts, sci-
ence, management,
architecture,
engineering, computer science, law,
medicine, dentistry, health profes-
sions, and graduate studies.
Dalton brothers U.S. outlaws.
Probably born in Cass Co., Mo., they
worked as cowboys in Oklahoma but
by 1889 had become horse thieves.
In 1890–91 they robbed gambling
houses, trains, and banks. In 1892
Bob, Grat, and Emmett Dalton and
two other gang members rode into
Coffeyville, Kan., to robits banks;
they were recognized, and vigilante
citizens killed all but Emmett, who
was wounded and sent to prison for
14 years. The fourth brother, Bill, had returned to Oklahoma before the
raid; he later formed his own gang, and was shot by lawmen in 1894 while
playing with his daughter.
Daly River
Dandolo
Danton
Dardanelles
criminal lawyer. He represented striking Pennsylvania coal miners, draw-
ing attention to working conditions and the use of CHILD LABOUR (1902–03);
secured the acquittal of WILLIAM HAYWOOD in the assassination of Gov.
Frank R. Steunenberg of Idaho (1907); and sought
to defend the
McNamara brothers, accused of bombing the Los Angeles Times building
(1911). He saved Richard Loeb and Nathan Leopold from a death sen-
tence for the murder of 14-year-old Robert Franks and won acquittal for
members of an African American family who had fought a mob trying to
expel them from their home in a white Detroit neighbourhood (1925–26).
Perhaps his most famous case was the SCOPES TRIAL (1925), in which he
defended a high school teacher who was charged with violating a Ten-
nessee state law against teaching Darwin’s theory of evolution.
darshan or darsan
database management system (DBMS) System for quick search
Date Line See INTERNATIONAL DATE LINE
also FISSION-TRACK DATING; HELIUM DATING; LEAD-210 DATING; RUBIDIUM-STRONTIUM
DATING; URANIUM-234–URANIUM-238 DATING; URANIUM-THORIUM-LEAD DATING.
Daubenton
NOLOGY; CABLE MODEM; DSL; ISDN; FAX; RADIO; TELETYPE; T1; WIRELESS COMMU-
NICATIONS.
story collection Monday Tales (1873), the play L’Arlésienne (1872), the
novels The Nabob (1877) and Sappho (1884), and several volumes of
memoirs. His son, Léon Daudet (1867–1942), edited with CHARLES MAU-
RRAS the reactionary review L’Action Française and was a virulent sati-
rist and polemicist on the subjects of medicine and psychology as well
as public affairs.
Daughters of the American Revolution (DAR) U.S. patriotic
society for direct descendants of soldiers or others who aided the cause of
independence. It was organized in 1890 and chartered by Congress in 1895.
Its historical division stresses the study of U.S. history and preservation of
Americana. Its educational division provides scholarships and loans, helps
support schools for underprivileged youth and for Americanization train-
ing, sponsors prizes, and publishes manuals. Its patriotic division publishes
the Daughters of the American Revolution Magazine and The National
Defense News. It was long known for its conservatism; its refusal in 1939
to let the black singer MARIAN ANDERSON perform at Washington’s Consti-
tution Hall led to her famous concert at the Lincoln Memorial.
Daumier
became the city’s leading painter after the death of HANS MEMLING. Most
of his works are altarpieces and other panels featuring traditional religious
themes, but his best-known paintings, The Judgment of Cambyses and The
Flaying of Sisamnes (1498), deal with the theme of justice; they origi-
nally hung in the town hall of Bruges. His works are among the earliest
Flemish paintings to feature the Italian Renaissance iconography of putti
(male child angels) and garlands.
David
Davos
SIBELIUS.
Commission and arranged the DAWES PLAN. He served as vice president
(1925–29) under CALVIN COOLIDGE. He shared the 1925 Nobel Prize for
Peace with Sir AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN.
Dawes General Allotment Act or Dawes Severalty Act
YOUNG PLAN.
dawn redwood Coniferous, nonevergreen tree (Metasequoia glyp-
tostroboides), the only living species of the genus Metasequoia, of the
family Taxodiaceae, native to remote valleys of central China. Both
branchlets and leaves grow out in pairs from points along the stem. The
bright green, feathery leaves turn reddish brown in autumn. Though
Metasequoia fossils are abundant, the tree was thought to be extinct until
living specimens were discovered in the 1940s. Only a few thousand are
known to have survived, in central China. Since these stands were dis-
covered, seeds and cuttings have been planted throughout the world.
Dawson, George Geoffrey orig. George Geoffrey Robin-
Daxue
Dayak
development. Though embittered, he was widely honoured as the father
of radio and the grandfather of television.
De Gasperi
he advocated and who favoured more violent tactics. He then created the
unsuccessful Workers’ International Industrial Union.
de Man
Debrecen
possible outcomes for each experiment, giving information about the state
of affairs preparatory to making a decision; a set of available acts depend-
ing on the experiments made and their consequences; and a set of pos-
sible consequences of the acts, in which each possible act assigns to each
possible initial state some particular consequence. The problem is dealt
with by assessing probabilities of consequences conditional on different
choices of experiments and acts and by assigning a utility function to the
set of consequences according to some scheme of value or preference of
the decision maker. An optimal solution consists of an optimal decision
function, which assigns to each possible experiment an optimal act that
maximizes the utility, or value, and a choice of an optimal experiment.
See also COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS, GAME THEOR Y.
Decius
deciduous tree Broad-leaved tree that sheds all its leaves during one
season. Deciduous forests are found in three middle-latitude regions with
a temperate climate characterized by a winter season and year-round pre-
cipitation: eastern North America, western Eurasia, and northeastern Asia.
They also extend into more arid regions along stream banks and around
bodies of water. OAKS, BEECHES, BIRCHES, CHESTNUTS, ASPENS, ELMS, MAPLES, and
gave up its North African colonies by 1962. Portugal gave up its African
colonies in the 1970s; Macau was returned to the Chinese in 1999.
decompression chamber See HYPERBARIC CHAMBER
decompression sickness also called the bends or caisson dis-
also POSTMODERNISM; POSTSTRUCTURALISM.
Decoration Day See MEMORIAL DAY
decorative arts Arts concerned with the design and decoration of
objects that are utilitarian rather than purely aesthetic, including CERAMICS,
glassware, BASKETR Y, JEWELR Y, METALWORK, FURNITURE, and TEXTILES. The separa-
FORMAL AND INFORMAL).
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
decompression chamber (cid:2) defamation
BOU, ELK, MULE DEER, MUNTJAC, RED DEER, ROE DEER, WHITE-TAILED DEER.
Rival European red deer stags (Cervus elaphus) fighting for possession of a hind in
the rutting season.
STEFAN MEYERS GDT/ARDEA LONDON
deer mouse or white-footed mouse Any of about 60 species
defecation
Deinarchus See DINARCHUS
Deinonychus
Delaunay
Deleuze
blue ground. Andrea (di Marco) Della Robbia (1435–1525), Luca’s
nephew, assumed control of the workshop c. 1470. Trained as a marble
sculptor, his best-known works are ten roundels of infants on the facade
of Florence’s Foundling Hospital (c. 1487). Giovanni Della Robbia
(1469–1529), the most distinguished of Andrea’s sons, took control of the
family workshop after his father’s death. His early works, notably a lavabo
in Santa Maria Novella (1497) and medallions in the Loggia of San Paolo
(1493–95), were collaborations with his father.
dell’Abbate, Niccolo See Niccolo dell’ABBATE
Delmarva Peninsula Peninsula, eastern U.S. Extending between
CHESAPEAKE and DELAWARE bays, it is about 180 mi (290 km) long and up
to 70 mi (110 km) wide. Encompassing parts of the states of Delaware,
Maryland, and Virginia—hence its name—it includes Maryland’s Eastern
Shore. Fishing and tourism are economically important to the area.
Delors
Democratic Republic of the Congo See Democratic Republic of
the CONGO
Democrats of the Left (DS) formerly (1921–91) Italian Commu-
nist Party (1991–98) Democratic Party of the Left Major Italian
political party. Founded as the Partito Comunista Italiano (PCI) in 1921
by dissidents of the ITALIAN SOCIALIST PARTY’s left wing, it was outlawed with
other political parties by BENITO MUSSOLINI’s fascist government in 1926
and went underground. It participated in the Italian Resistance in World
War II. After the war it joined in coalition governments and was consis-
tently successful at the polls. In 1956, after the crimes of JOSEPH STALIN
were revealed, PALMIRO TOGLIATTI tried to dissociate the PCI from the Soviet
Union. ENRICO BERLINGUER, as party leader from 1972 to 1984, became the
leading proponent of EUROCOMMUNISM. In order to consolidate left-wing
forces and broaden its base, the party changed its name to Democratic
Party of the Left in 1991; it became one of Italy’s largest political parties
and western Europe’s largest communist party. In 1998 it renamed itself
Democrats of the Left.
Democritus
demurrer
metre (kg/m3). The expression “particle density” refers to the number of
particles per unit volume, not to the density of a single particle. See also
SPECIFIC GRAVITY.
D’Entrecasteaux
“Do not bear false witness.” The most important exponent of deontolog-
ical ethics is IMMANUEL KANT. See also CATEGORICAL IMPERATIVE.
Depardieu
dermatitis or eczema
also used. All are energy-intensive and therefore expensive. Currently,
more than 2 billion gallons (8 million cu m) of fresh water are produced
each day by several thousand desalination plants throughout the world,
the largest plants being in the Arabian Peninsula.
Descartes
17th century, the name was often used for two quite distinct areas. Gaelic
Desmond extended over part of modern Counties Kerry and Cork; Anglo-
Norman Desmond extended over northern Kerry, most of the modern
county of Limerick, southwestern Tipperary, eastern and southern County
Cork, and eastern Waterford.
Desmoulins
deuterium oxide See HEAVY WATER
Deuteronomic Reform
nephew, Karl August Devrient (1797–1872), acted in Dresden, Karlsruhe,
and principally Hannover (1839–72), where he was popular in plays by
Shakespeare, Goethe, and Schiller. Karl’s brother Eduard (1801–77)
began his career as an opera singer, then worked as an actor and stage
director in Dresden (1844–52) and Karlsruhe (1852–70), where he
directed German classics and made new translations of Shakespeare’s
plays. Karl’s other brother, Emil (1803–72), made his stage debut in 1821
and acted with the Dresden court theatre (1831–68); his greatest successes
were as Hamlet and as Goethe’s Tasso. Eduard’s son Otto (1838–94) acted
in various companies, then became a director in Karlsruhe and other Ger-
man cities. In Weimar he produced his own version of Goethe’s Faust
(1876); he also wrote several tragedies. Karl’s son Max (1857–1929)
made his debut in Dresden in 1878 and in 1882 joined the famed Vienna
Burgtheater.
dew Deposit of water droplets formed at night by the condensation of
water vapour from the air onto the surfaces of exposed objects. Dew forms
on clear nights, when exposed surfaces lose heat by radiation and are thus
usually colder than the air. The cold surface cools the air in its vicinity,
and, if the air is humid enough, it may cool below its dew point, the tem-
perature at which water vapour condenses out of the air onto the surface.
See also FROST.
Dewar
the country’s leading industrial cen-
Its historic buildings include
temples, churches, and more than
700 mosques, some of which date to
the 15th century.
dialysis
Diderot
dicot See COTYLEDON, FLOWERING PLANT
Didyma
NUTRITION and are most effective combined with exercise. Appetite sup-
pressants may have dangerous side effects. Excessive weight loss may be
a sign of ANOREXIA NERVOSA.
Dietrich
See also ANALOG COMPUTER.
Digital Subscriber Line See DSL
digital-to-analog conversion (DAC) Process by which digital sig-
digital video disk See DVD
digitalis
Dilke
Dimitrov
Diocletian
Lucien Lelong. In 1947 he introduced his revolutionary “New Look,”
which featured small shoulders, a natural waistline, and a voluminous
skirt, a drastic change from the World War II look of padded shoulders
and short skirts. In the 1950s the “sack,” or “H” line, became the char-
acteristic silhouette of his designs. He was instrumental in commercial-
izing Parisian fashion on a worldwide scale.
diorite
recording. See also ACTOR-MANAGER SYSTEM; AUTEUR THEOR Y.
Directoire style
essary to chase intruders from a territory or for animals to injure each
other in competition for mates. One type of defensive display deceives
predators or lures them away from vulnerable young. See also BIRDSONG;
COURTSHIP BEHAVIOUR.
used for CONSUMPTION or SAVING.
Dispur
hands. From 17th-century England, the word distaff became a synonym
for maternal as most spinning was done by women in their homes. See
also DOMESTIC SYSTEM.
distribution See FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION, NORMAL DISTRIBUTION
the products. See also ASSOCIATIVE LAW; COMMUTATIVE LAW.
District Court, U.S. See UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
District of Columbia Federal district of the U.S. Coextensive with the
city of WASHINGTON, it is bounded by Maryland and Virginia. Originally
100 sq mi (259 sq km), the territory was authorized by Congress in 1790
and granted by Maryland and Virginia; it now occupies 68 sq mi (176 sq
km). The site was chosen by Pres. GEORGE WASHINGTON and became the
seat of the federal government by 1800. Part of the district (ALEXANDRIA,
Va.) was retroceded to Virginia in 1847. The slave trade was prohibited
in the District in 1850 and slavery was abolished in 1862. The territorial
government was abolished in 1874 in favour of government by a com-
mission appointed by the president. Residents were granted suffrage in
national elections in 1961 by the 23rd Amendment to the U.S. CONSTITU-
TION. The mayor-council form of government was established in 1967.
Originally appointees of the president, the mayor and councilors became
elected officials in 1973 and received local legislative powers in 1974.
dithyramb
AQUAVIT; BRANDY; GIN; LIQUEUR; RUM; VODKA; and WHISKEY.
divertimento
pioneers of jazz, although many critics of popular music believe the term
better describes the music of a later wave of white Chicago musicians
including Jimmy McPartland, Bud Freeman, and Frank Teschemacher.
The earliest jazz ensembles grew out of the RAGTIME and brass bands of
New Orleans, incorporating elements of the BLUES. In early jazz ensembles,
such as those led by KING OLIVER and JELLY ROLL MORTON, the trumpet or
cornet plays the melody, with clarinet and trombone providing accompa-
niment. The tension created by soloists contrasts with the release of
ensemble refrains. It is played with a distinctive two-beat rhythm, result-
ing in ajoyous cacophony at fast tempos or slow, mournful dirges. Dix-
ieland groups usually include banjo, tuba, and drums.
Dixon, Joseph (b. Jan. 18, 1799, Marblehead, Mass., U.S.—d. June
15, 1869, Jersey City, N.J.) U.S. inventor and manufacturer. Largely self-
taught, Dixon began his pioneering industrial use of GRAPHITE in 1827 with
the manufacture of lead pencils, stove polish, and lubricants. He discov-
ered that graphite crucibles withstood high temperatures, and he secured
patents on graphite crucibles for making steel and pottery. He established
a crucible steelworks in Jersey City in 1850. He also experimented with
photography and photolithography and devised a technique for printing
banknotes in colour to prevent counterfeiting.
Dixon, Willie orig. William James Dixon (b. July 1, 1915, Vicks-
Djakarta See JAKARTA
Djibouti
Dnieper River
Doctors Without Borders French Médecins Sans Frontières
Dog Star See SIRIUS
Dollar Diplomacy U.S. foreign
Dollfuss
Dombrowska, Maria See Maria D/BROWSKA
Dome of the Rock or Mosque of Omar Oldest existing Islamic
Domenichino
Dominica
tic service has declined in the U.S. and Europe since the early 1920s, a trend
attributed to the leveling of social classes, greater job opportunities for
women, and the spread of labour-saving household devices.
domestic system or putting-out system Production system wide-
RIK IBSEN. GERHART HAUPTMANN, EUGENE O’NEILL, and ARTHUR MILLER wrote
Domingo, Plácido (b. Jan. 21,
1941, Madrid, Spain) Spanish tenor
and conductor. He moved to Mexico
in 1949 with his parents, both of
whom were ZARZUELA (a form of Span-
ish light opera) singers. He studied
voice, piano, and conducting, mak-
ing his debut as a baritone. After
developing his tenor range, he made
his U.S. debut, spent three years in
Tel Aviv (singing in Hebrew), came
to the New York City Opera in 1965,
and debuted with the Metropolitan
Opera at Lewissohn Stadium in
1966. His resonant, powerful voice,
imposing physical
stature, good
looks, and dramatic ability made him
one of the most popular tenors of the
second half of the 20th century.
Dominic, Saint orig. Domingo
de Guzmán (b. 1170, Caleruega,
Castile—d. Aug. 6, 1221, Bologna,
Romagna; canonized July 3, 1234;
feast day August 8) Founder of the
Domitian
late 1940s. DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER, JOHN F. KENNEDY, and LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Portuguese power in the colony. Each donatário received a portion of land
and was charged with recruiting and protecting settlers and promoting
agriculture and commerce. At one time Brazil’s viability as a colony
depended on the success of the donatários, but by 1754 all the captain-
cies had been abolished.
Donatello
Dong Thap Muoi See Plain of REEDS
Dong Zhongshu
Garden (1916), Hymen (1921), and Red Roses for Bronze (1929). She was
also acclaimed for her translations, verse drama, and prose works.
Doolittle, Jimmy orig. James Harold Doolittle (b. Dec. 14, 1896,
Alameda, Calif., U.S.—d. Sept. 27, 1993, Pebble Beach, Calif.) U.S. gen-
eral. He enlisted in the army in World War I and became an aviator. After
the war he earned a Ph.D. in engineering and remained in the Army Air
Corps as a test pilot until 1930, when he became head of aviation for
Shell Oil Co. In 1932 he set a world air speed record. Returning to active
duty during World War II, he led a daring raid on Tokyo (1942), for which
he received the Congressional Medal of Honor. He commanded air opera-
tions on many fronts, including attacks on Germany in 1944–45. After the
war he remained active in the aerospace industry. He received the Presi-
dential Medal of Freedom in 1989.
door Movable barrier installed in the entry of a room or building to
restrict access or provide visual privacy. Early doors were hides or tex-
tiles. With monumental architecture came pivoting doors of rigid, perma-
nent materials; important chambers often had stone or bronze doors.
Pompeiian doors looked much like modern wooden doors; they were
constructed of stiles (vertical planks) and rails (horizontal planks) fastened
together to support panels and occasionally equipped with locks and
hinges. The typical Western medieval door was of vertical planks backed
with horizontal or diagonal bracing. In the 20th century, a single, hollow-
core panel door became most common. Other types include the revolv-
ing door, folding door, sliding door (inspired by the Japanese SHOJI), rolling
door, and Dutch door (divided horizontally so that the lower or upper part
can be opened separately).
Door Peninsula Peninsula, northeastern Wisconsin, U.S. Located
between GREEN BAY and Lake MICHIGAN, it was named for a strait atits tip
known as La Porte des Mortes (“Death’s Door”). About 80 mi (130 km)
long and 25 mi (40 km) wide at its base, the peninsula was visited in the
17th century by French traders and missionaries. It is now a year-round
vacation area, and tourism is a major business. The whole peninsula is
popularly known as Door County, though Door is but one of four coun-
ties on the peninsula.
dopamine
dormer Window set vertically in a structure that projects from a slop-
ing roof. It often illuminates a bedroom. In the late Gothic and early
Renaissance periods, elaborate masonry dormers were designed. Dormers
were used along with the mansard ROOF to defy a Parisian law limiting
buildings to six stories; the seventh story was called a garret (or attic) and
was made habitable by the dormer. See also GABLE.
dormouse Any of 20 RODENT species (family Gliridae) found through-
out Eurasia and northern Africa.
Dormice have large eyes, soft fur,
rounded ears, and a hairy (sometimes
bushy)
tail. They live in trees,
bushes, and rock walls and in nests
of plant material. They eat fruit, nuts,
birds’ eggs, and some insects and
small animals. Many species sleep
for long periods, particularly in win-
ter. The largest species, the edible
dormouse (Glis glis),
is gray and
attains a maximum length of about 8
in. (20 cm), excluding the 6-in. (15-
cm) tail.
Dornberger
of the ACCUSED; DUE PROCESS.
double refraction or birefringence Optical property in which a
single ray of unpolarized light (see POLARIZATION) splits into two compo-
nents traveling at different velocities and in different directions. One ray
is refracted (see REFRACTION) at an angle as it travels through the medium,
while the other passes through unchanged. The splitting occurs because
the speed of the ray through the medium is determined by the orientation
of the light compared with the CR YSTAL LATTICE of the medium. Since unpo-
larized light consists of waves that vibrate in all directions, some will pass
through the lattice without being affected, while others will be refracted
and change direction. Materials that exhibit double refraction include ICE,
QUARTZ, and SUGAR.
ALEXANDER CARTWRIGHT.
Doubs River
Douglas-Home
Down syndrome or trisomy
draft See BILL OF EXCHANGE
draft See CONSCRIPTION
LINE.
Drake equation or Green Bank equation Equation claimed to
Drakensberg
m) and extends from southwest to northeast in LESOTHO and southeastern
South Africa, separating the extensive high plateaus of the interior from
the lower lands along the coast. It is an area of many game reserves and
national parks.
Draper, Charles Stark (b. Oct. 2, 1901, Windsor, Mo., U.S.—d. July
25, 1987, Cambridge, Mass.) U.S. aeronautical engineer. He taught at MIT
from 1935, where he developed a gunsight for naval ANTI-AIRCRAFT GUNS
that was installed on most U.S. naval vessels in World War II. His iner-
tial guidance system, called spatial inertial reference equipment (SPIRE),
allowed planes, submarines, and ballistic missiles to travel thousands of
miles to their destinations without reference to outside navigational aids,
such as radio or the positions of celestial bodies. His group at the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology also developed guidance systems for
the APOLLO program. He is memorialized in the annual Charles Stark
Draper Prize for achievement in engineering.
Draper, Ruth (b. Dec. 2, 1884, New York, N.Y., U.S.—d. Dec. 30, 1956,
New York City) U.S. monologist. She began her career by writing dramatic
sketches about people she had observed and performing them at parties.
She made her New York debut (1917) in a series of one-act pieces. Her
London debut (1920) established her as a master monologist. She per-
formed worldwide, playing on a bare stage with few props and creating
characters and settings by subtle modulation of feature, gesture, and voice.
Drau River See DRAVA RIVER
Drava River
Dresden Codex Latin Codex Dresdensis One of the few pre-
dressage
up its errors in making the case. After a new court-martial (1899) again
found Dreyfus guilty, he was pardoned by the president of the republic in
an effort to resolve the issue. In 1906 a civilian court of appeals cleared
Dreyfus and reversed all previous convictions. Formally reinstated and
decorated with the Legion of Honor, he later saw active service in World
War I. The affair resulted in the separation of church and state in 1905.
Dreyfuss
drupe Fruit
MANGO, OLIVE, and WALNUT.
Drury Lane Theatre Oldest
English theatre still in use. It was
built in London by Thomas Killi-
grew for his acting company as the
Theatre Royal (1663). It burned in
1672 and was rebuilt in 1674 with
CHRISTOPHER WREN as architect. It prospered under such actor-managers as
COLLEY CIBBER and later under DAVID GARRICK and RICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN.
Drusus Germanicus
illegal drugs also have medical uses (see COCAINE; HEROIN; DRUG ADDICTION).
See also DRUG RESISTANCE; PHARMACOLOGY; PHARMACY.
drug addiction or chemical dependency Physical and/or psy-
addictions are to alcohol (see ALCOHOLISM), BARBITURATES, TRANQUILIZERS, and
drug poisoning or medicinal poisoning Harmful effects of
Dry Tortugas
(metaphysical dualism); also, any theory that employs dualisms.
Examples of epistemological dualisms are subject and object and sensa-
tion and sensibilia; examples of metaphysical dualisms are mind and mat-
ter, good and evil, and God and world. Dualism is distinguished from
MONISM and PLURALISM.
Dubayy or Dubai
duck hawk See PEREGRINE FALCON
ductus arteriosus
Dujardin
Dumfries
one roof, are a focal point in the modern city centre. Dundee was a world
centre for jute manufacturing in the 19th century. Textiles are still pro-
duced, but since World War II light engineering has become the predomi-
nant industry. The University of Dundee was founded in 1881.
dune See SAND DUNE
dung beetle Any member of one subfamily (Scarabaeinae) of SCARAB
BEETLES, which shapes manure into a ball (sometimes as large as an apple)
with its scooperlike head and paddle-shaped antennae. They vary from
0.2 to more than 1 in. (5–30 mm) long. In early summer it buries itself
and the ball and feeds on it. Later in the season the female deposits eggs
in dung balls, on which the larvae will later feed. They are usually round
with short wing covers (elytra) that expose the end of the abdomen. They
can eat more than their own weight in 24 hours and are considered help-
ful because they hasten the conversion of manure to substances usable by
other organisms.
Dungannon
DuPont Co. in full E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co. U.S. chemi-
Dupuytren
Durga-puja
Duryea
Duvalier
as the absorbent, and sodium nitrate was added as an oxidizing agent to
increase the strength of the explosive.
dysentery
E. coli
CHRISTUS, DIRCK BOUTS, HUGO VAN DER GOES, and HANS MEMLING.
588 I
Earth impact hazard (cid:2) East
1,000 Earth-crossing asteroids larger than 0.6 mi (1 km) may exist.
Impacts of 0.6-mi-size asteroids are believed to occur a few times every
million years. Such a collision would deliver the explosive force of sev-
eral HYDROGEN BOMBs, possibly resulting in global climate disturbances or
huge tidal waves. The impact of an object about 6 mi (10 km) in diam-
eter is thought to have caused a massive extinction of species, including
the DINOSAURs, at the end of the CRETACEOUS PERIOD.
Earth impact hazard The danger of collision with ASTEROIDS and COM-
ETS whose orbits carry them near EARTH. Space around Earth contains vast
numbers of objects in a range of sizes, but only the largest, which strike
very rarely on average, are thought to pose a great danger. Scientists
believe such an impact caused the mass EXTINCTION of DINOSAURS and other
species at the end of the CRETACEOUS PERIOD 65 million years ago. In addi-
tion to creating tremendous immediate destruction, a large impact could
throw great clouds of debris into the atmosphere, cutting off sunlight and
causing a prolonged temperature drop—an “impact winter” (similar to a
NUCLEAR WINTER) that would kill plant life and bring on worldwide famine.
The amount of damage depends primarily on the colliding object’s mass
and relative velocity. The energy released, expressed in millions of tons
(megatons) of TNT, falls between about 10 megatons and 1 billion mega-
tons, corresponding to objects roughly 160 ft (50 m) to 12 mi (20 km)
across. The last destructive impact known, the TUNGUSKA EVENT, occurred
over Siberia in 1908. Since the 1990s, search programs have scanned for
objects on possible collision courses. Should a collision appear likely,
nonexplosive projectiles or, in extreme cases, NUCLEAR WEAPONS might suc-
ceed in redirecting the object away from Earth.
ronment and Development Conference held in Rio de Janeiro
(June 3–14, 1992) to reconcile worldwide economic development with
environmental protection. It was the largest gathering of world leaders in
history, with 117 heads of state and representatives of 178 countries.
Biodiversity, GLOBAL WARMING, sustainable development, and preservation
of tropical rain forests were among the topics discussed. Five international
agreements were signed amid tensions between the industrialized coun-
tries of the North and the poorer developing states of the South, who were
reluctant to accept environmental restrictions without increased Northern
economic aid. Follow-up meetings were held in 1997 at the UN General
Assembly in New York and in 2002 in Johannesburg, S.Af. See also RIO
TREATY.
also CREAMWARE.
Lead-glazed earthenware water pot,
Paris, 15th century, in the National
Museum of Ceramics, Sèvres, France.
COURTESY OF THE MUSEE NATIONAL DE LA CERAMIQUE,
SEVRES
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Earthworm (Lumbricus terrestris).
Earthshine on the moon.
COURTESY OF YERKES OBSERVATORY, WISCONSIN
JOHN MARKHAM
REVOLUTION.
East Prussia German Ostpreussen
East African Rift System See GREAT RIFT VALLEY
LU XUN; MURASAKI SHIKIBU.
East China Sea See CHINA SEA
East India Co. or English East India Co. English CHARTERED COM-
PANY formed for trade with East and Southeast Asia and India, incorpo-
rated in 1600. It began as a monopolistic trading body, establishing early
trading stations at Surat, Madras (now CHENNAI), Bombay (MUMBAI), and
Calcutta (KOLKATA). Trade in spices was its original focus; this broadened
to include cotton, silk, and other goods. In 1708 it merged with a rival
found, as well as evidence of Roman occupation. The South Saxons came
to dominate the area, and they were in turn subjugated by WESSEX. In 1066
William of Normandy (see WILLIAM I) landed at Pevensey and fought the
Battle of HASTINGS. Along the coast, Hove, BRIGHTON, Peacehaven, Seaford,
Eastbourne, Bexhill, and Hastings form an ever-lengthening line of
resorts.
Country occupying the eastern half of the island of Timor, Southeast Asia.
Bounded by the Timor Sea and by the western half of TIMOR, it also
East-West Schism See SCHISM OF 1054
Easter Island Spanish Isla de Pascua native Rapa Nui
Ebbinghaus
land CREE, DELAWARE, FOX, HURON, Illinois, IROQUOIS, MOHICAN, MIAMI, MIC-
MAC, MOHAWK, MOHEGAN, MONTAGNAIS AND NASKAPI, OJIBWA, ONEIDA,
EB virus See EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS
useful when the required stroke of the reciprocating motion is small in
comparison with the dimensions of the driving shaft. Because an eccen-
tric can be attached anywhere along a shaft, it is unnecessary to form any
part of the shaft into a CRANK. Eccentrics are seldom used to transmit large
FORCES because FRICTION loss would be high; they are commonly used to
drive the valve gears of engines.
Eccles
singer and bandleader. Eckstine sang with EARL HINES’s big band (1939–
43), then formed his own band in 1944. Sympathetic with the new sounds
of BEBOP, Eckstine engaged many of its innovators, including DIZZY GILLESPIE,
CHARLIE PARKER, and SARAH VAUGHAN. Disbanding the group in 1947, he
achieved greater popular success as a solo performer, specializing in bal-
lads that featured his deep, resonant baritone. He was one of the greatest
interpreters of popular song and blues in jazz.
eclampsia See PREECLAMPSIA AND ECLAMPSIA
eclipsing variable star or eclipsing binary BINAR Y STAR in an orbit
ABLE STAR.
ecliptic
tal investment, research and development, and export strategies. See also
CAPITALISM, COMMUNISM, SOCIALISM, ZAIBATSU.
MATHEMATICS, POLITICAL SCIENCE, and SOCIOLOGY.
Economist, The Weekly magazine of news and opinion, founded in
1843 and published in London, generally regarded as one of the world’s
preeminent journals of its kind. It gives thorough and wide-ranging cov-
erage of general news and particularly of international political develop-
ments that bear on the world’s economy. In accord with the views
promoted by its founders and conveyed by legendary Economist editor
WALTER BAGEHOT, the publication maintains the position that free markets
typically provide the best method of running economies and governments.
North America accounts for about half of its total readership.
ecosystem
GROWTH.
and STRATIGRAPHY.
also ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
ecoterrorism or ecological terrorism or environmental ter-
ectopic pregnancy
Eddy, Mary Baker orig. Mary
edelweiss
Edgeworth-Kuiper belt See KUIPER BELT
Edinburgh
values and accumulated knowledge of a society. In developing cultures
there is often little formal education; children learn from their environ-
ment and activities, and the adults around them act as teachers. In more
complex societies, where there is more knowledge to be passed on, a more
selective and efficient means of transmission—the school and teacher—
becomes necessary. The content of formal education, its duration, and who
receives it have varied widely from culture to culture and age to age, as
has the philosophy of education. Some philosophers (e.g., JOHN LOCKE)
have seen individuals as blank slates onto which knowledge can be writ-
ten. Others (e.g., Jean-Jacques ROUSSEAU) have seen the innate human state
as desirable in itself and therefore to be tampered with as little as pos-
sible, a view often taken in alternative education. See also BEHAVIOURISM;
JOHN DEWEY; ELEMENTAR Y EDUCATION; HIGHER EDUCATION; KINDERGARTEN; LYCEUM
MOVEMENT; PROGRESSIVE EDUCATION; PUBLIC SCHOOL; SPECIAL EDUCATION; TEACHING.
cation include PLATO, JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU, and JOHN DEWEY.
SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY.
PARK and QUEEN ELIZABETH NATIONAL PARK. It was named by HENR Y MORTON
Edward II known as Edward of Caernarfon
efficiency or mechanical efficiency In mechanics, the measure of
the effectiveness with which a system performs. It is stated as the ratio
of a system’s WORK output to its work input. The efficiency of a real sys-
tem is always less than 1 because of FRICTION between moving parts. A
machine with an efficiency of 0.8 returns 80% of the work input as work
output; the remaining 20% is used to overcome friction. In a theoretically
frictionless, or ideal, machine, the work input and work output are equal,
and the efficiency would be 1, or 100%.
effigy mound Earthen mound in the form of a bird or animal (e.g,
bear, deer, turtle, buffalo), found in the northern central U.S., especially
the Ohio River valley. Little is known of the effigy mounds except that
most were burial sites. The culture that produced them dates from AD 300
to the mid-17th century. See also HOPEWELL CULTURE.
Effigy Mounds National Monument Archaeological site, north-
eastern Iowa, U.S. Located on the Mississippi River, it covers 4 sq mi (10
sq km). Established in 1949, the monument has 183 known mounds, some
of which are in the shape of birds and bears. The mounds were built over
the course of the Woodland period (1000 BC–AD 1200), with the effigy
mounds probably constructed between AD 400 and 1200. Many mounds
have yielded copper, bone, and stone tools of Indian origin. One of the
bear mounds is 137 ft (42 m) long and 3.5 ft (1 m) high.
eft See NEWT
Egas Moniz
Edwards, Blake orig. William Blake McEdwards (b. July 26,
Egill Skallagrímsson
Ehrenberg
seen at LUXOR, KARNAK, ABYDOS, and ABU SIMBEL.
Ehrenburg
Eijkman
Eisenstein
AMERICA. Area: 8,124 sq mi (21,042 sq km). Population (2005 est.):
6,881,000. Capital: SAN SALVADOR. The majority of the people are mesti-
Elagabalus
Elbrus
in some areas to ensure a fairer distribution of legislative seats to con-
stituencies that may be denied representation under the plurality or major-
ity formulas. See also PARTY SYSTEM, PLURALITY SYSTEM, PRIMAR Y ELECTION.
Electra In Greek legend, the daughter of AGAMEMNON and Clytemnestra.
When Agamemnon was murdered by Clytemnestra and her lover Aegis-
thus, Electra saved her young brother ORESTES from the same fate by send-
ing him away. Orestes later returned, and Electra helped him kill their
mother and Aegisthus. She then married her brother’s friend Pylades. The
story is treated in plays by AESCHYLUS, SOPHOCLES, and EURIPIDES.
Electra complex See OEDIPUS COMPLEX
electric automobile Battery-powered motor vehicle. Originating in
the 1880s, electric cars were used for private passenger, truck, and bus
transportation in cities, where their low speeds and limited battery range
were not drawbacks, and the cars became popular for their quietness and
low maintenance costs. Until 1920 they were competitive with gasoline-
fueled cars; they became less so after the electric self-starter made
gasoline-powered cars more attractive and MASS PRODUCTION made them
cheaper to produce. In Europe electric vehicles have been used as short-
range delivery vans. Renewed interest in electric cars beginning in the
1970s, spurred especially by new consciousness of foreign oil dependency
and environmental concern, led to improvements in speed and range.
Recent laws, particularly in California, have mandated commercial pro-
duction. “Hybrid” cars employing both electric and internal combustion
engines and providing the best features of both technologies, have recently
become commercially available. Experimental vehicles have used solar
FUEL CELLS.
electric circuit See CIRCUIT
electric dipole
electrical impedance
electromyography
ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION.
bined with QUANTUM MECHANICS into the theory of QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS.
FORCE and the STRONG FORCE.
Examples include RADIO WAVES, INFRARED RADIATION, visible LIGHT, ULTRAVIOLET
RADIATION, X RAYS, and GAMMA RAYS. Electromagnetic radiation exhibits
wavelike properties such as REFLECTION, REFRACTION, DIFFRACTION, and INTERFER-
ENCE, but also exhibits particlelike properties in that its energy occurs in
discrete packets, or quanta. Though all types of electromagnetic radiation
travel at the same speed, they vary in FREQUENCY and WAVELENGTH, and inter-
act with matter differently. A VACUUM is the only perfectly transparent
medium; all others absorb some frequencies of electromagnetic radiation.
electromagnetic spectrum Total range of FREQUENCIES or WAVELENGTHs
of ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION. The spectrum ranges from waves of long
wavelength (low frequency) to those of short wavelength (high fre-
quency); it comprises, in order of increasing frequency (or decreasing
wavelength): very-low-frequency to ultrahigh-frequency RADIO WAVEs,
MICROWAVEs, INFRARED RADIATION, visible LIGHT, ULTRAVIOLET RADIATION, X-RAYs,
and GAMMA RAYs. In a VACUUM, all waves of the electromagnetic spectrum
travel at the same speed: 299,792,458 m/sec (186,282 mi/sec).
AUDION,
electrophoresis
Eleusinian Mysteries
Elephant Man orig. Joseph (Carey) Merrick (b. Aug. 5, 1862,
Elgin
by Tory opponents in England and French-Canadian rioters in Montreal.
He negotiated the Reciprocity Treaty (1854) between the Canadian colo-
nies and the U.S. In 1857 he left Canada to serve in diplomatic posts in
China, Japan, and India.
Elgin Marbles
ential English-language modernist poet. He won the Nobel Prize for Lit-
erature in 1948; from then until his death he achieved public admiration
unequaled by any other 20th-century poet.
miraculously changed into roses. This transformation convinced him of the
worthiness of her kind endeavours, about which he had been chiding her.
Elizabethan
Elsevier family See ELZEVIR FAMILY
Elsheimer
Embargo Act Legislation by the U.S. Congress in December 1807 that
closed U.S. ports to all exports and restricted imports from Britain. The
act was Pres. THOMAS JEFFERSON’s response to British and French interfer-
ence with neutral U.S. merchant ships during the NAPOLEONIC WARS. The
embargo had little effect in Europe, but it imposed an unpopular restric-
tion on New England merchants and exporters (see HARTFORD CONVENTION).
Legislation passed in 1809 lifted the embargo, but continued British inter-
ference with U.S. shipping led to the WAR OF 1812.
Embden
émigré nobility
assumption of the title, as a putative successor of Charlemagne, was a
direct threat to the HABSBURG DYNASTY. Queen VICTORIA of Britain took the title
empress of India. Non-European peoples whose rulers have been called
emperor include the Chinese, Japanese, Mughals, Incas, and Aztecs.
emphysema
harvest and before the next growing season, the land was used by the
community for the grazing of livestock and other purposes. In England
the movement for enclosure began in the 12th century and proceeded rap-
idly from 1450 to 1640; the process was virtually complete by the end of
the 19th century. In the rest of Europe, enclosure made little progress until
the 19th century. Common rights over arable land have now been largely
eliminated.
encomienda
endoscopy
English Channel or the Channel French La Manche
turbines. INTERNAL-COMBUSTION ENGINES were developed by NIKOLAUS OTTO
and RUDOLF DIESEL in the late 19th century. Gas turbines and rocket engines
came into use in the later 20th century. See also DIESEL ENGINE, GASOLINE
ENGINE, JET ENGINE, ROCKET, and ROTAR Y ENGINE.
engineering Professional art of applying science to the optimum con-
version of the resources of nature to the uses of humankind. Engineering
is based principally on physics, chemistry, and mathematics and their
NEERING, CIVIL ENGINEERING, CHEMICAL ENGINEERING. GENETIC ENGINEERING, MECHANI-
CAL ENGINEERING, MILITAR Y ENGINEERING.
ENIAC
iron) in magnesium- and iron-rich igneous rock types. Enstatite crystal-
lizes in the orthorhombic system (three unequal axes at right angles to
each other).
entablature Assemblage of horizontal moldings and bands supported
by the columns of Classical buildings. The entablature is usually divided
into three main sections: the lowest band, or architrave, which originally
took the form of a beam running from support to support; the central band,
or frieze, consisting of an unmolded strip with or without ornament; and
the top band, or cornice, constructed from a series of moldings that project
from the edge of the frieze. Most entablatures correspond to or are derived
from the Doric, Ionic, or Corinthian ORDER.
entamoeba
Eocene
Epicurus
fers from cells in which episomes have been incorporated in the chromo-
somes have been used to determine the locations of genes on the
chromosome.
epistatic gene
privileges and protections, such as exemption from compulsory military
service and economic support by their husbands. Supporters, led by the
NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN, argued that discriminatory state and
federal laws left many women in a state of economic dependency.
equality Generally, an ideal of uniformity in treatment or status by those
in a position to affect either. Acknowledgment of the right to equality often
must be coerced from the advantaged by the disadvantaged. Equality of
opportunity was the founding creed of U.S. society, but equality among
all peoples and between the sexes has proved easier to legislate than to
achieve in practice. Social or religious inequality is deeply ingrained in
some cultures and thus difficult to overcome (see CASTE). Government
efforts to achieve economic equality include enhancing opportunities
through tax policy, subsidized training and education, redistributing
wealth or resources, and preferential treatment of those historically treated
unequally (see AFFIRMATIVE ACTION). See also CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT; FEMINISM;
GAY RIGHTS MOVEMENT; HUMAN RIGHTS; UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS.
DIFFERENTIAL
laws of PHYSICS. See also SYSTEM OF EQUATIONS.
by British authorities (1827–58) before the
official takeover by the Spanish. The main-
land was not effectively occupied by the
Spanish until 1936.
Independence was
declared in 1968, followed by a reign of
terror and economic chaos under the dictatorial president Macías Nguema,
who was overthrown by a military coup in 1979 and later executed.
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo became leader of the country in 1979.
A new constitution was adopted in 1982, but political unrest persisted into
the 21st century despite the country’s oil wealth.
eques
equation, algebraic See ALGEBRAIC EQUATION
equation, difference See DIFFERENCE EQUATION
equation, quadratic See QUADRATIC EQUATION
equation of motion See equation of MOTION
equation of state See equation of STATE
equations, system of See SYSTEM OF EQUATIONS
Equator Great circle around the Earth that is everywhere equidistant
from the geographic poles and lies in a plane perpendicular to the Earth’s
axis. This geographic, or terrestrial, Equator divides the Earth into the
Northern and Southern Hemispheres and forms the imaginary reference
line on the Earth’s surface from which LATITUDE is reckoned (i.e., 0° lati-
tude). In astronomy, the celestial equator is the great circle in which the
plane of the terrestrial Equator intersects the celestial sphere; it is thus
equidistant from the celestial poles. When the Sun lies in its plane, day
and night are everywhere of equal length; this happens at the EQUINOXes.
Equatorial Africa See FRENCH EQUATORIAL AFRICA
equatorial coordinates See CELESTIAL COORDINATES
descended from the dawn horse (see EOHIPPUS). Wild horses, which once
inhabited much of northern Eurasia, were smaller and had shorter legs
than their domesticated descendants. See also PRZEWALSKI’S HORSE.
equinox
in approximation theory with Paul Turan, and with Atle Selberg gave an
astounding elementary proof of the prime number theorem (1949).
Famously eccentric, he traveled almost constantly for his last 40 years,
collaborating with hundreds of mathematicians on numerous problems.
Erech
Erigena
palatial buildings, royal tombs, and paved roads have been uncovered,
leading to hypotheses that the site represents a Xia capital. The society
employed advanced bronze technology. The relationship between Erlitou
bronzes and those produced earlier at Qijia in Gansu remains unclear. See
HONGSHAN CULTURE; NEOLITHIC PERIOD.
ermine
WATERGATE SCANDAL, he became something of a folk hero for his unceas-
ing pursuit of evidence in the face of White House claims of executive
privilege. His earthy humour, distinctive accent, and unfailing charm con-
tributed to his popularity.
Erving, Julius (Winfield) (b. Feb. 22, 1950, Roosevelt, N.Y., U.S.)
U.S. basketball star. He played two years at the University of Massachu-
setts before joining the professional American Basketball Association
(ABA). At 6 ft 7in.
(2 m), “Doctor J” played forward for the Virginia
Squires (1971–73) and the New York Nets (1973–76), whom he led to
two ABA titles (1974, 1976). After the merger of the ABA and NBA, Erv-
ing was traded to the Philadelphia 76ers (1977–87) and won a league title
in 1983. He was known for swarming defense, imaginative drives to the
basket, and climactic slam dunks.
erythema
Escoffier
Espartero
of the FRENCH REVOLUTION in 1789, when the deputies of the Third Estate
led in founding the NATIONAL ASSEMBLY.
Este family
Essex, Robert Devereux, 2nd earl of (b. Nov. 10, 1567, Neth-
Essex, Robert Devereux, 3rd
earl of (b. 1591, London, Eng.—d.
Sept. 14, 1646, London) English
military commander. Son of the 2nd earl of ESSEX, he began his military
career in 1620 and commanded forces for CHARLES I until the LONG PARLIA-
MENT deposed Charles’s ministers (1640). As the ENGLISH CIVIL WARS began,
he was appointed to command the Parliamentary army. He fought against
the Royalists at the indecisive Battle of Edgehill (1642) and advanced on
London in 1643. His army was besieged at Lostwithiel, Cornwall, in 1644,
and all surrendered except Essex, who escaped by sea. He resigned his
command in 1645.
Essex, Walter Devereux, 1st earl of (b. Sept. 16, 1541, Car-
marthen, Carmarthenshire, Wales—d. Sept. 22, 1576, Dublin, Ire.)
English soldier. Born to a titled family, he helped suppress a rebellion in
northern England in 1569 and was made earl of Essex in 1572. In 1573
he offered to subdue and colonize, at his own expense, a portion of Ulster
that had not accepted English overlordship. There he treacherously cap-
tured and executed the Irish rebel leaders and massacred hundreds of the
populace, contributing to Irish bitterness toward the English. ELIZABETH I
commanded him to break off the enterprise in 1575. He died of dysen-
tery shortly after returning to Ireland from England.
Britannica
CONCISE
ENCYCLOPEDIA
Front cover: (clockwise from top row, le f t ) Vincenzo
 Images;
 Ange rmaye r ;
Hans Hinz, Basel; Sean Ga l lup /Ge t ty Images;
courtesy of the
Germany, John F. Shrawder/Shostal. Back cover:
NA SA / J P L ;
 P ramod
Chandra; Anthony Mercieca from The National
Audubon Society Collection/Photo Researchers;
J.C. Allen and Son; Stephen
Researchers.
Britannica
CONCISE
ENCYCLOPEDIA
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Chicago • London • New Delhi • Paris • Seoul • Sydney • Taipei • Tokyo
Britannica
CONCISE
ENCYCLOPEDIA
Encyclopædia Britannica
First published in 1768, the Encyclopædia Britannica has long been the standard by which all
other reference works are judged.  It represents a tradition of excellence that was built, over 
the centuries, on meticulous scholarship and unmatched attention to detail.  Today,
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., produces a range of fine products for reference, education, and
learning in different media and in many different languages. Wherever you see the Britannica
name—in print, on the Internet, CD-ROM, or DVD—it is your guarantee of quality, accuracy,
and authority.
© 2006 BY ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
Copyright Under International Copyright Union
All Rights Reserved Under International and Universal Copyright Conventions
by Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2006921235
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-59339-492-9
The original edition of this book, created in conjunction with Merriam-Webster, Incorporated, was published
in 2000 as Merriam-Webster ’s Collegiate Encyclopedia. 
No part of this work may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publisher.
Encyclopædia Britannica and other fine products are available on the Internet at http://www.britannica.com.
(Trademark Reg. U.S. Pat. Off.) Printed in Peru.
Contents
Foreword
Explanatory Notes
Abbreviations
Pronunciation Symbols
Guide to Plates and Map Legend
Britannica Concise Encyclopedia
Encyclopædia Britannica Corporate Page
Merriam-Webster Editorial Staff
Foreword
T he need for information and the craving
for knowledge are timeless and univer-
sal. The Britannica Concise Encyclopedia
satisfies the essence of both these needs.
This volume represents the distillation of
essential information into a compact and eminently
useful single volume.
This latest version of Britannica Concise Encyclopedia
answers today’s need for a portable, convenient ref-
erence work covering history, geography, the sci-
ences, religion, sports, entertainment, technology,
and the arts. We hope it will become a favourite
source for helping students with their homework,
for background to news events, for writers and
crossword-puzzle enthusiasts, for solving disputes,
and for random browsing.
This printing of Britannica Concise Encyclopedia has
been broadly revised. Among the 2.8 million words
that make up the nearly 28,000 entries are many
new titles and many that have been updated. In the
16-page colour plates section, you will find the
newest versions of national flags as well as a
world map, maps of world religions and popula-
tion characteristics, a selection of World Heritage
sites, and a useful world map depicting interna-
tional time zones. More than 30 tables catalog
everything from Nobel Prize winners to chemical
elements to popes to the International System of
Units of measurement and their U.S. equivalents.
Many of the more than 190 maps have been
revised, and all of the more than 150 illustrations
have been redrawn. The more than 2,000 photo-
graphs enhance both the appearance and content
of Britannica Concise.
The editors of Encyclopædia Britannica are proud
to present the Britannica Concise Encyclopedia. We
hope that you will consult it often and that it will
both satisfy your immediate need for information
and lead you to the in-depth information of the 40
million words of the Encyclopædia Britannica.
Creating the highest level of reference works has
been our goal for 238 years, and we are pleased to
welcome you to the Britannica family.
Anita Wolff
Editor
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
older and generally discarded name for an entity,
usually a geographical locale. The label officially
indicates a formal or legal version of a name. The
label in full precedes a fully spelled-out version of a
name that is usually encountered in its shorter
form. A label consisting of a language name pre-
cedes a native version or spelling of a name or term.
Biographical entry headwords in particular may
employ parentheses in several ways. Parentheses
may enclose portions of a person’s name that are
rarely used, a person’s original given name or
names, a later addition such as a title, or transla-
tions of titles or epithets. 
drum or croaker
Odin or Wotan 
Bacall, Lauren orig. Betty Joan Perske 
O’Connell, Daniel known as the Liberator 
Iqaluit formerly Frobisher Bay
Latvia officially Republic of Latvia 
OCR in full optical character recognition
fax in full facsimile
Magellan, Strait of Spanish Estrecho de 
Magallanes
Odysseus Roman Ulysses
Connelly, Marc(us Cook)
Doctorow, E(dgar) L(aurence)
Hughes,  (James Mercer) Langston
Basil II known as Basil Bulgaroctonus (“Slayer of
the Bulgars”) 
Pronunciations. Entries for terms and names
whose pronunciation the encyclopedia’s likely
users might hesitate over are supplied with pro-
nunciations. Foreign names or terms that are pro-
nounced in a markedly different way by native
speakers and English-speakers are frequently pro-
vided with two pronunciations, one of them pre-
ceded by a language label (e.g., English, French,
Spanish). Thus, for Hassan II we provide the pro-
Alphabetization.
The articles are alphabetized
word by word, with further alphabetizing letter by
letter within a word.  A “word” is here defined as a
unit of one or more characters set off from other
words by spaces, dashes, hyphens, or other symbols.
Entry titles consisting of more than one word are
arranged in alphabetical order of the succeeding
words.  Titles with identical spellings are arranged in
the order (1) persons, (2) places, and (3) things. The
following list illustrates the word-by-word principle:
Horn, Cape
Horn of Africa 
hornbill
Horne, Lena
horned toad
Hornsby, Rogers
Further alphabetization rules include the follow-
ing: (1) Diacritics, apostrophes, dashes, periods,
and ampersands are ignored in alphabetization. (2)
Names of monarchs and popes that are identical
except for the Roman numeral following the name
are ordered numerically. (3) Names beginning with
Mac- and Mc- are ordered literally, all names begin-
ning with Mac- preceding (by a number of pages)
all names beginning with Mc-. (4) Entry headwords
beginning with numbers are alphabetized as if they
were spelled out.
Entry headword style. Variant spellings or ver-
sions of the encyclopedia’s entry headwords are
printed in boldface type when they are in common
use; more obscure variants are printed in ordinary
roman type. No effort has been made to be exhaus-
tive in listing variants.
Several italicized terms are used to discriminate
among the variants. The label or simply indicates a
common alternative name or spelling. The label
orig. precedes the birth name of a person who is
entered under a name that was adopted or acquired
subsequently. When a person’s original surname is
different from the name in the principal headword,
the entire birth name is given, not enclosed in
parentheses. The label known as precedes a common
way of referring to a person that may never have
had formal status. The label formerly indicates an
Chinese names are almost always transcribed
according to the Pinyin system. Where a Chinese
name or term appears as a headword, the older
Wade-Giles spelling is given as an or variant.  Place-
names and biographical names on Taiwan, howev-
er, are generally listed in their Wade-Giles spelling,
with the Pinyin spelling as a variant. A few Chinese
names widely used in English (e.g., Confucius)
retain their traditional English spelling.
Japanese names and terms are generally transcribed
according to the Hepburn system but without
macrons to indicate vowel length.
Russian names and terms generally observe tradi-
tional Western spellings and follow the diacritic-
free system employed by the U.S. Board on
Geographic Names. 
Arabic names and terms generally follow the best-
established Western usage. Except in a few well-
established Western transliterations, the l in the arti-
cle al- or el- (“the”) is not assimilated to a following
consonant (thus, we employ the spelling Harun al-
Rashid, not Harun ar-Rashid), even though such
assimilation reflects Arabic pronunciation and is
sometimes encountered in English sources.
Cross-references. Cross-references to other articles
are indicated by small capitals in sans-serif type for
the alphabetized element of the term or name. Thus,
“J. VON NEUMANN” sends the reader to the V’s, “J. W.
von GOETHE” to the G’s; “CAPE BRETON ISLAND” sends the
reader to the C’s, “Cape of GOOD HOPE” to the G’s;
and so on. In the case of personal names in which
there is no ambiguity as to alphabetical placement,
the entire name appears in small capitals.
A term is cross-referenced only when it is likely that
the reader of the article within which the cross-ref-
erence appears would want to be notified about the
additional article. Hence many terms for which
there are corresponding entries are not highlighted
as references. For instance, in the article on Tim
Berners-Lee, we have cross-referenced “World Wide
Web” (whose invention was his principal achieve-
ment) but not “Internet,” which is naturally cross-
referenced within the “World Wide Web” article.
Because cross-referencing of this kind is discre-
tionary, readers should not assume that a noun
lacks its own entry simply because it is not refer-
enced within the article being read.
For the sake of saving space, many people who
receive their own entries have their given names
abbreviated and their surnames in small capitals
when they are mentioned in an article, regardless of
how likely the reader of the article is to want to be
alerted to the biographical entry. The names of
countries, U.S. states, and Canadian provinces, by
contrast, are virtually never referenced, regardless
of their centrality to a given article, on the pre-
sumption that readers will correctly assume that the
encyclopedia contains articles on all such entities.
Some 3,000 cross-references are provided at their
own alphabetical place, to direct the reader who has
looked up a variant version of the name or has
expected an entry to be alphabetized according to
an element other than the one actually used.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Abbreviations
anno Domini
Admiral
Alabama
Amer. American
Ariz.
Arizona
Arkansas
before Christ
Celsius
circa
California
Capt.
captain
cubic centimetre(s)
century, centuries
cent.
centimetre(s)
Company, County
Colorado, Colonel
Conn. Connecticut
Corp.
Corporation
cubic
District of Columbia
Delaware
Doctor
exempli gratia (for example)
estimate, estimated
Ethiopia
Fahrenheit
flourished
Florida
foot, feet
gram(s)
Georgia
General
Governor
id est (that is)
Illinois
inch(es)
Indiana
Junior
Kelvin
Kansas
kilogram(s)
kilometre(s)
kilometres per hour
Kentucky
Louisiana
lb, lbs
pound, pounds
metre(s)
M.A. Master of Arts
Major
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Mass. Massachusetts
Maryland
Maine
mile(s)
Mich. Michigan
Minn. Minnesota
Miss. Mississippi
millilitre(s)
millimetre(s)
Missouri
Mont. Montana
miles per hour
North
North Carolina
North Dakota
northeastern
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
northwestern
New York
Okla.
Oklahoma
Oregon
ounce(s)
Pennsylvania
Ph.D.
Doctor of Philosophy
Pres.
President
Queen. Queensland
reigned, ruled
Reverend
Rhode Island
South
South Carolina
South Dakota
southeastern
Senator
square
Saint
southwestern
Tenn.
Tennessee
United Nations
United States
Virginia
versus
Vermont
West Virginia
Wash. Washington
Wisc. Wisconsin
Wyoming
banana, collide, abut, humdrum
Guide to Plates
Flags of the World
World Political Map
World Religions Map
World Population Density Map
World Indigenous Skin Color Map
World Heritage sites
International Time Zones
Plates
1 – 9
Plates
10 – 11
Plate
Plate
Plate
Plates
14 – 15
Plate
Map Legend
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
This page intentionally left blank 
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
A Coruña
!Abb)s
dian prime minister (1891–92). Educated at McGill University in Mon-
treal, he became a lawyer in 1847 and was made queen’s counsel in 1862.
He was dean of McGill University law school from 1855 to 1880. After
serving in the legislative assembly (1857–74, 1880–87), he was appointed
to the Senate and became government leader. Upon the death of JOHN
MACDONALD, he became the compromise choice for prime minister. Ill
health forced his resignation in 1892.
abbreviation Shortened form of a written word or phrase used in place
of the whole. Abbreviations began to proliferate in the 19th century and
have been prevalent since; they are employed to reduce the time required
for writing or speaking, especially when referring to the myriad new
organizations, bureaucratic entities, and technological products typical of
industrial societies. An abbreviation can now easily become a word, either
as an initialism in which the letters are pronounced individually (e.g., TV
or FBI) or as an acronym in which the letters are combined into syllables
(e.g., scuba, laser, or NAFTA).
ABC in full American Broadcasting Co. Major U.S. television
network. It began when the expanding national radio network NBC split
into the separate Red and Blue networks in 1928. To avoid a communi-
cations monopoly, NBC was forced to sell the Blue network in 1941. Its
buyer, Edward J. Noble, maker of Life-Savers candies, gave the company
its present name. After merging with United Paramount Theaters in 1953,
ABC expanded into the emerging television industry and soon became
one of the three top networks. It specialized in sports broadcasting and
developed the instant replay in 1961. It was bought by Capital Cities
Communications in 1985 and by the Walt Disney Co. in 1995.
!Abd al-!Azlz ibn !Abd al-Raem)n ibn FayÆal 0l Sa!)d See
IBN SA!ãD
!Abd al-Malik ibn Marw)n
Abbott, Bud; and Costello, Lou orig. William Alexander
Abbott, Sir
John (Joseph
Caldwell) (b. March 12, 1821, St.
Andrews, Lower Canada—d. Oct. 30, 1893, Montreal, Que., Can.) Cana-
ama, which included about 1,400 paintings. Favoured at court, in 1576
he was appointed master of the mint, and in 1584 he was made dlw)n
(revenue commissioner) of Multan.
!Abd All)h
Abenaki
DIAMOND, CORUNDUM, EMER Y) or synthetic (e.g., silicon CARBIDE or CARBORUN-
DUM, synthetic diamond, alumina—a synthetic form of corundum). They
range from the relatively soft particles used in household cleansers and
jeweler’s polish to diamonds.
Abruzzo
Abnaki See ABENAKI
abnormal psychology or psychopathology Branch of psychol-
LEAF WHITTIER, former slaves such as FREDERICK DOUGLASS, and HARRIET BEECHER
STOWE. The election of ABRAHAM LINCOLN, who opposed the spread of sla-
very to the West, marked a turning point in the movement. Convinced
that their way of life was threatened, the Southern states seceded from the
Union (see SECESSION), which led to the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR. In 1863 Lin-
coln (who had never been an abolitionist) issued the EMANCIPATION PROC-
LAMATION, which freed slaves held in the Confederate states; the 13th
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution (1865) prohibited slavery through-
out the country. Slavery was abolished in Latin America by 1888. In some
parts of Africa and in much of the Islamic world, it persisted as a legal
institution well into the 20th century.
Abominable Snowman Tibetan Yeti Mythical monster believed to
inhabit the HIMALAYAS near the snow line. The Yeti is thought to resemble
an oversized man covered with shaggy fur. Reported sightings are rare;
evidence of its existence consists largely of unusual footprints left in the
snow, probably the tracks of bears. At certain gaits, bears place the hind-
foot partly over the imprint of the forefoot, thus creating tracks that
resemble the footprints of a very large primate heading in the opposite
direction.
Aborigine See AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINAL
abortion Expulsion of a fetus from the uterus before it can survive on
its own. Spontaneous abortion at earlier stages of pregnancy is called MIS-
CARRIAGE. Induced abortions often occur through intentional medical inter-
vention and are performed to preserve the woman’s life or health, to
prevent the completion of a pregnancy resulting from rape or incest, to
prevent the birth of a child with serious medical problems, or because the
woman does not believe she is in a position to rear a child properly. The
drug RU-486, if taken within a few weeks of conception, will trigger a
miscarriage. Up to about 19 weeks of pregnancy, injections of saline
solutions or hormones may be used to stimulate uterine contractions that
will expel the fetus. Surgical removal of the contents of the uterus may
be performed in the second trimester or later. Intact dilation and extrac-
tion procedures may occur in the third trimester; sometimes critically
referred to as “partial-birth abortions,” they have been very controversial.
Other abortion procedures include manual vacuum aspiration (extraction
by manual syringe) and dilation and suction curettage (extraction by
machine-operated suction), both of which can be performed in early preg-
abscess
ing from various discontented groups, he succeeded in overthrowing the
last Umayyad caliph, Marw)n II (750), and was rewarded with the gov-
ernorship of Khor)s)n. His popularity led the second !Abb)sid caliph,
al-ManÆHr, to view him as a threat and have him put to death. See also
!ABB0SID DYNASTY.
Ab) Qlr
Acadian orogeny
Accra
Acheulean
Acosta
actinide
acupressure or shiatsu
Adams, Charles Francis (b. Aug. 18, 1807, Boston, Mass., U.S.—d.
Nov. 21, 1886, Boston) U.S. diplo-
mat. The son of JOHN QUINCY ADAMS
and the grandson of JOHN ADAMS, he
served in the Massachusetts legisla-
ture and edited a Whig journal. He
helped form the antislavery FREE-SOIL
PARTY and in 1848 was chosen its can-
didate for U.S. vice president. As
ambassador to Britain (1861–68) he
was instrumental in securing Brit-
ain’s neutrality during the American
Civil War and in promoting the arbi-
tration of the ALABAMA CLAIMS.
Adams, Gerry orig. Gerard
Adams (b. Oct. 6, 1948, Belfast,
N.Ire.) Irish nationalist and president
of SINN FÉIN, the political wing of the
IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (IRA). He was
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, WASHINGTON, D.C.
Charles Francis Adams
delegate to the CONTINENTAL CONGRESS
INDEPENDENCE.
John Adams, oil painting by Gilbert
Stuart, 1826; in the National Collec-
tion of Fine Arts, Washington, D.C.
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS,
SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION, WASHINGTON D.C.
Adams (cid:2) Adamson
MUTINY case.
Adamson, Joy orig. Joy-Friederike Victoria Gessner (b. Jan.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
She later repeated her rehabilitation success with cheetah and leopard
cubs. In addition to writing other books, she founded the Elsa Wild Ani-
mal Appeal (1961), an international conservation fund. She was killed by
a disgruntled employee.
Adamson, Robert See HILL, David Octavius, and Robert Adamson
Adana
New Guinea in 1946. When Papua New Guinea attained independence in
1975, the islands became part of that country.
admiralty law See MARITIME LAW
adobe
Adler, Larry orig. Lawrence Cecil Adler (b. Feb. 10, 1914, Bal-
Admiralty, High Court of See HIGH COURT OF ADMIRALTY
adrenaline See EPINEPHRINE
Adrian
include direct mail (see DIRECT-MAIL MARKETING), billboards and posters, tran-
sit advertising, the Internet, and promotional items such as matchbooks or
calendars. Advertisers attempt to choose media that are favoured by the
advertisers’ target audience. See also MARKETING; MERCHANDISING.
Aeroflot
Aethelberht I See ETHELBERT I
Aethelred Unraed See ETHELRED II
Aetolia
AFL-CIO in full American Federation of Labor-Congress of
See also LANE KIRKLAND; KNIGHTS OF LABOR; WALTER REUTHER.
!Aflaq
African Methodist Episcopal Church (AME Church) African
African National Congress (ANC) South African political party
Africa. See also INKATHA FREEDOM PARTY; ALBERT LUTULI; PAN-AFRICAN MOVEMENT.
WITCHCRAFT AND SORCER Y.
Afrikaans
begun a scramble to partition the continent, and by 1920 much of it was
under colonial rule. Anticolonial sentiment developed gradually, becom-
ing widespread after 1950, and one by one the colonies became indepen-
dent, the last in 1990. Political instability, refugee problems, famine, and
AIDS are the chief problems facing the continent at the start of the 21st
century. See map on following page.
Africa Proconsular Roman province. It was founded after Rome defeated
CARTHAGE in 146 BC and was subsequently extended to include NUMIDIA and
the northern part of modern Libya. Between 30 BC and AD 180, other parts
of northern Africa, including CYRENAICA and Mauretania, became part of
the ROMAN REPUBLIC AND EMPIRE. In the 5th century the region was taken by
the VANDALS, though areas were later reconquered by the BYZANTINE (Eastern
Roman) Empire; the Muslims conquered the area in the late 7th century.
Africa, Horn of See HORN OF AFRICA
African ant bear See AARDVARK
BULI STYLE; DÉBLÉ; SEGONI-KUN; TELUM FIGURE; TRICKSTER TALE; and African authors
by name, such as CHINUA ACHEBE; AIMÉ CÉSAIRE; BIRAGO DIOP; ATHOL FUGARD;
NADINE GORDIMER; WOLE SOYINKA; AMOS TUTUOLA.
African languages Languages indigenous to Africa that belong to the
NIGER-CONGO, NILO-SAHARAN, KHOISAN, and AFRO-ASIATIC language phyla.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
aftosa See FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE
Aga Khan
See also CAPE TOWN; GREAT TREK; NATIONAL PARTY.
Afro-Asiatic languages formerly Hamito-Semitic languages
Afro-Caribbean, Afro-Brazilian, and Afro-American reli-
on an 1875 trip to the western coast of South America led him to chal-
lenge CHARLES DARWIN’s theory of coral reef formation.
Agassiz, Elizabeth Cabot orig. Elizabeth Cabot Cary (b. Dec.
Agassiz
ageratum
FERTILIZERS, HERBICIDES, and INSECTICIDES. Most are mixtures of two or more
Aguán
Aemadiyyah
graphed for the company included its
signature Revelations (1960), set to
black spirituals. From the 1960s to
the 1980s,
the company toured
worldwide, and Ailey became one of
the best-known U.S. choreographers.
Ailly
Airedale terrier
SALLY ANNE THOMPSON/EB INC.
airbrush (cid:2) airship
and landing. See also AIRFOIL; AVIATION; GLIDER; HELICOPTER.
Two physical forces essential to airplane flight are thrust and lift. Jet engines, such
as the turbofan shown, provide forward thrust by taking in air through the front of
the engine, compressing it, and burning it with fuel in the combustor. Hot exhaust
gases and air are then expelled at high speed from the rear of the engine. Lift is
generated by the flow of air past the wings. Air flowing over the rounded upper
surface of a wing moves faster than air flowing past the flat lower surface; as a
result, the air above the wing exerts a lower pressure than the air below, producing
a net upward force, or lift. Both lift and drag (friction caused by the plane moving
through air) can be adjusted by the movement of ailerons, landing flaps, and tabs
on the wings’ edges. At the rear of the plane, the elevator, located on the horizon-
tal stabilizer, controls the airplane’s movement around the lateral axis. Both the
elevator and the rudder, located on the vertical stabilizer, help to control turning
movements initiated by the ailerons.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
!0#ishah
Shortly after his reign began, he began to encourage the exclusive wor-
ship of the little-known deity ATON, a sun god he regarded as the source
of all blessings. Assuming the name Akhenaton (“One Useful to Aton”),
he moved his capital from Thebes to present-day TELL EL-AMARNA to escape
established religious powers and make a fresh start. A new art style that
focused on the details of actual life rather than on timeless conditions
became popular. In government, Akhenaton tried to recapture the old
authority of the ruler, which had been largely diverted to bureaucrats and
officials, but his focus on his new religion to the exclusion of affairs of
state resulted in the disintegration of Egypt’s Asian empire. He was suc-
ceeded by two of his sons-in-law, Smenkhkare and TUTANKHAMEN, but after
Tutankhamen’s early death the army took over
the throne, and
Akhenaton’s new religion was abandoned.
Akhmatova
Alaca Hüyük
NATIONAL PARK AND PRESERVE, ANIAKCHAK NATIONAL MONUMENT AND PRESERVE,
Alaskan king crab See KING CRAB
Alaskan malamute Sled dog developed by the Malemiut, an Eskimo
group. It is a strongly built dog with a broad head, erect ears, and a
plumelike tail carried over its back. Its thick coat is usually gray and white
or black and white, the colours frequently forming a caplike or masklike
marking on the head. It stands 23–25 in. (58–64 cm) tall and weighs 75–85
lbs (34–39 kg). Characteristically loyal and friendly, it has served on
expeditions to the Antarctic.
Alaungpaya
GUAGES, and TURKISH.
Albany
Albigensian
main maritime trade routes of the East and to build permanent fortresses
with settled populations. His conquests were inspired by the Crusading
spirit of King John II, rather than by considerations of mercantile gain.
Alcaeus
Alcuin
Aldrich
Aleutian
Alexander Nevsky
the land assemblies fell into gradual disuse, the professional bureaucracy
and regular army grew in importance, and patriarch NIKON’s reforms of
the Russian Orthodox church were adopted. Though reportedly warm-
hearted and popular, Alexis was a weak ruler who sometimes entrusted
matters of state to incompetent favourites.
Alexius I Comnenus
algae
lowed, most prominently the ALMORAVID (c.
1054–1130), which extended its domain to
Spain, and the ALMOHAD (c. 1130–1269).
The BARBAR Y COAST pirates menaced Medi-
terranean trade for centuries; their raids served as a pretext for France to
enter Algeria in 1830. By 1847 France had established military control
over most of the region and by the late 19th century had instituted civil
rule. Popular protest against French rule resulted in the bloody ALGERIAN
WAR (1954–61); independence was achieved following a referendum in
1962. Beginning in the early 1990s, Islamic fundamentalist opposition to
secular rule led to an outbreak in civil violence between the army and
various Islamic extremist groups.
Algerian Reformist !Ulam)#
MU!0WIYAH.
Ali, Muhammad orig. Cassius (Marcellus) Clay (b. Jan. 17,
Aliákmon
ATOMS have only one ELECTRON in the outermost shell, they are very reac-
tive chemically (they react rapidly, even violently, with water), form
numerous compounds, and are never found free in nature.
alkaline earth metal Any of the six chemical ELEMENTS in the second
leftmost group of the PERIODIC TABLE (BER YLLIUM, MAGNESIUM, CALCIUM, STRONTIUM,
Allahabad
Allen, Steve orig. Stephen Valentine Patrick William Allen
Allen, Woody orig. Allen Stewart Konigsberg (b. Dec. 1, 1935,
Allenby (of Megiddo and of Felixstowe), Edmund Henry
Allende
Allingham
Almendros
Alsatian See GERMAN SHEPHERD
Altai Mountains Russian Altay
Altgeld, John Peter (b. Dec. 30, 1847, Niederselters, Prussia—d.
March 12, 1902, Joliet, Ill., U.S.) German-born U.S. politician, governor
of Illinois (1893–97). He emigrated from Germany as a child. In the 1870s
he moved to Chicago, where he accumulated a small fortune in real estate
and became active in Democratic Party politics. In 1892 he won the gov-
ernorship as a reformist candidate. In 1893, at the urging of CLARENCE DAR-
ROW and labour leaders, he granted clemency to three men convicted of
complicity in the HAYMARKET RIOT. The controversial pardon provoked an
outcry from conservatives and contributed to his defeat for reelection in
1896, though Altgeld’s decision later gained wide approval in judicial
circles.
altimeter
He was governor of Guatemala in 1527–31. In 1539 he began an explo-
ration of central Mexico, but died while quelling an Indian uprising.
Alvarez
amaranth
Ambon
58 I American Association (cid:2) American Indian Movement
try (see ABOLITIONISM). Cofounded in 1833 by WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON and
ARTHUR TAPPAN, it promoted the formation of state and local auxiliaries to
agitate for abolition. Despite violent opposition, by 1840 the group had
2,000 auxiliaries and more than 150,000 members, including THEODORE
WELD and WENDELL PHILLIPS. Its most effective public meetings featured tes-
timony by former slaves, including FREDERICK DOUGLASS and WILLIAM WELLS
BROWN. In 1839 it split into two factions: a radical group led by Garrison
that denounced the Constitution as supportive of slavery and a moderate
faction led by Tappan that led to the birth of the LIBERTY PARTY.
American Association of Retired Persons See AARP
American Ballet Theatre Prominent ballet company based in New
York City. It was founded in 1939 as the Ballet Theatre (the name was
changed in 1958) by Lucia Chase and Richard Pleasant to promote works
“American in character.” Oliver Smith replaced Pleasant as codirector in
1945; MIKHAIL BAR YSHNIKOV served as artistic director from 1980 to 1989
after dancing with the company in the 1970s. New ballets were created
for the company by AGNES DE MILLE, JEROME ROBBINS, TWYLA THARP, and ANT-
ONY TUDOR; MICHEL FOKINE revived many of his earlier works for them as
well. Principal dancers have included ALICIA ALONSO, ERIK BRUHN, ANTON
DOLIN, and NATALIA MAKAROVA.
American Bar Association (ABA) Voluntary association (founded
1878) of U.S. lawyers, judges, and other legal professionals. The largest
bar association in the U.S., it seeks to improve the legal profession, ensure
the availability of legal services to all citizens, and improve the admin-
istration of justice. It conducts educational and research projects, spon-
sors professional meetings, and publishes a monthly journal. At the
beginning of the 21st century its membership exceeded 400,000.
American Broadcasting Co. See ABC
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) Organization founded by
American Civil War or Civil War or War Between the States
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
American Federation of Labor–Congress of Industrial
Organizations See AFL–CIO
American Indian or Native American or Amerindian Any
member of the various aboriginal peoples of the Western Hemisphere,
with the exception of the ESKIMOs (Inuit) and the ALEUTs. Though the term
Native American is today often preferred over American Indian, particu-
larly in the U.S., many Native American peoples continue to prefer Ameri-
can Indian (or Indian). In Canada the name First Nation is preferred. The
ancestors of the American Indians were nomadic hunters of northeast Asia
who migrated over the Bering Strait land bridge into North America prob-
ably during the last glacial period (20,000–30,000 years ago). By c.
10,000 BC they had occupied much of North, Central, and South America.
See also ANASAZI CULTURE; ANDEAN CIVILIZATION; CLOVIS COMPLEX; EASTERN
WOODLANDS INDIAN; FOLSOM COMPLEX; HOHOKAM CULTURE; HOPEWELL CULTURE;
MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION; MISSISSIPPIAN CULTURE; MOGOLLON CULTURE; NORTH-
WEST COAST INDIAN; PLAINS INDIAN; PUEBLO INDIAN; SOUTHEASTERN INDIAN; SOUTH-
WEST INDIAN; WOODLAND CULTURE.
QUOIAN, SIOUAN, MUSKOGEAN, ATHABASKAN, UTO-AZTECAN, SALISHAN) account
for many of the languages of eastern and interior North America, though
the far west was an area of extreme diversity (see HOKAN; PENUTIAN). It is
estimated that in Mexico and northern Central America (Mesoamerica),
an estimated 15–20 million people spoke more than 300 languages before
Columbus. The large OTOMANGUEAN and MAYA families and a single lan-
guage, NAHUATL, shared Mesoamerica with many smaller families and lan-
guage isolates. More than 10 of these languages and language complexes
still have more than 100,000 speakers. South America and the West Indies
had an estimated pre-Columbian population of 10–20 million, speaking
more than 500 languages. Important language families include Chibchan
in Colombia and southern Central America, QUECHUAN and Aymaran in
the Andean region, and ARAWAKAN, CARIBAN, and TUPIAN in northern and
central lowland South America. Aside from Quechuan and Aymaran, with
about 10 million speakers, and the TUPIAN language Guaraní, most remain-
ing South American Indian languages have very few speakers, and some
face certain extinction.
American Indian Movement (AIM) Civil rights organization
founded in 1968, originally to help urban AMERICAN INDIANs displaced by
government programs. It later broadened its efforts to include demands
for economic independence, autonomy over tribal areas, restoration of
illegally seized lands, and protection of Indian legal rights and traditional
culture. Some of its protest activities involved violence and were highly
publicized (see WOUNDED KNEE). Internal strife and the imprisonment of
some leaders led to the disbanding of its national leadership in 1978,
though local groups have continued to function.
American Indian religions, North Religious beliefs and practices
DANCE tradition and the NATIVE AMERICAN CHURCH. See also MESOAMERICAN
RELIGIONS.
American Indian religions, South Religious beliefs and practices
MESOAMERICAN RELIGIONS.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
American Indian religions (cid:2) American Revolution
American Legion Organization of U.S. war veterans. Founded in
1919, it works for the care of disabled and sick veterans and promotes
compensation and pensions for the disabled, widows, and orphans. Non-
political and nonsectarian, its membership requirement is honourable ser-
vice and an honourable discharge. It was instrumental in establishing
veterans’ hospitals, and it sponsored the creation of the U.S. Veterans
Administration in 1930. In 1944 it played an important role in the pas-
sage of the GI BILL. The American Legion claims about three million mem-
bers in some 15,000 local posts, or groups.
American Medical Association (AMA) Organization of U.S. phy-
sicians. It was founded in 1847 “to promote the science and art of medi-
cine and the betterment of public health.” It has about 250,000 members,
about half of all practicing U.S. physicians. It disseminates information
to its members and the public, operates as a lobbying group, and helps
set medical education standards. Its publications include Journal of the
American Medical Association, American Medical News, and journals on
medical specialties.
American Motors Corp. (AMC) Former U.S. automobile manufac-
turer. AMC was formed in 1954 from the merger of two pioneering auto
manufacturers, Nash-Kelvinator Corp. (successor to Nash Motor Co.,
founded 1916) and Hudson Motor Car Co. (founded 1909). AMC pro-
duced AMC compact cars, AM General trucks and buses, and, until 1968,
Kelvinator appliances. Jeeps joined the product line after AMC purchased
the Kaiser-Jeep Corp. (dating to 1903) in 1970. AMC became a subsid-
iary of CHR YSLER CORP. in 1987, which in turn merged with Daimler-Benz
in 1998 to form DAIMLERCHR YSLER AG.
American Museum of Natural History Major centre of research
American Party See KNOW-NOTHING PARTY
American Protective Association (APA) Secret anti-Catholic,
anti-immigrant society formed in Iowa in 1887. Its membership, consist-
ing mainly of farmers who feared the growth and political power of
immigrant-populated cities, rose to more than two million in the 1890s.
Membership dwindled after the election of 1896 and the return of agri-
cultural prosperity in the Midwest. By 1911 the society had disappeared.
American Renaissance or New England Renaissance Period
American Revolution or United States War of Indepen-
CR YSTAL PALACE exhibition (1851) did British engineers, viewing exhibits of
machines used in the U.S. to produce INTERCHANGEABLE PARTS, begin to apply
the system. Within 25 years, the American System was being widely used
in making a host of industrial products. See also ASSEMBLY LINE; FACTOR Y.
American Telephone and Telegraph Co. See AT&T
americium
American Saddlebred or American Saddle Horse Breed of
American Stock Exchange (AMEX) Stock exchange in the U.S.
Originally known as “the Curb,” it began as an outdoor marketplace in
New York City c. 1850. It moved indoors to its present location in the
Wall Street area in 1921. Once a marketplace for SECURITIES not reputable
enough for the NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE, it became equally respectable,
with its own listing admissions requirements. In 1998 it merged with the
National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD), then-owner of the
NASDAQ exchange, to form the Nasdaq-Amex Market Group. After
NASD sold its interest in the NASDAQ in 2000, AMEX remained a
NASD subsidiary.
American System of manufacture Production of many identical
Ethiopia’s population. Their language is Amharic, a Semitic language of
the AFRO-ASIATIC family, and their religion is ETHIOPIAN ORTHODOX. The
Amhara, who have dominated the history of their country, descend from
ancient Semitic conquerors who mingled with indigenous Cushitic
peoples. They are agriculturalists and place great value on land owner-
ship.
Amharic
Amish
formed in the 1930s, amniocentesis is generally done under local
anesthesia in the 15th–17th week of gestation.
amoeba
after the stone blocks arranged themselves into walls at the sound of
Amphion’s lyre. Amphion became king of Thebes, and he married NIOBE,
with whom he had six sons and six daughters. When their children were
killed by the gods, he committed suicide.
amphioxus
ZEOLITES.
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
anamorphosis
FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS. See also NUMERICAL ANALYSIS.
the DISTANCE FORMULA.
2001). See also LOGICAL POSITIVISM; VIENNA CIRCLE.
Anastasia Russian Anastasiya Nikolayevna (b. June 18, 1901,
Anastasius
SCHOOLING BEHAVIOUR.
ancien régime
Anderson, (James) Maxwell
ing the AMAZON and PILCOMAYO.
andesite
its institutions are based in Catalonian law, and it is part of the diocese
of Urgel (Spain). The traditional economy was based on sheep raising,
but tourism grew in importance since the 1950s and became central to
Andorra’s economy by the early 21st century.
Andorra la Vella
two—The Bridge on the Drina (1945) and Bosnian Story (1945)—are
about the history of Bosnia. He was awarded the Nobel Prize for Litera-
ture in 1961.
androgen
ing; aortic aneurysm rupture causes severe pain and immediate collapse.
Rupture of an aneurysm in the brain is a major cause of STROKES. Treat-
ment can consist of simply tying off a small vessel; more serious aneu-
rysms require surgery to replace the diseased section of artery with a
plastic graft.
Angara
built c. 1200 by King JAYAVARMAN VII. During the period of great construc-
tion that lasted more than 300 years, there were many changes in archi-
tecture as the religious focus changed from Hindu to Buddhist cults. After
the Siamese conquest of the Khmer in the 15th century, the ruined city
and its temples were buried in the jungle. When the French colonial
regime was established in 1863, the entire site became the focus of schol-
arly interest. During Cambodia’s political upheavals of the late 20th cen-
tury there was some war damage, but the major problem was one of
neglect. Angkor was added to the WORLD HERITAGE SITE list in 1992.
Angkor Wat
Angoulême
Anhui or An-hui conventional Anhwei
anion
been used by the indigenous inhabitants). It became independent in the
15th century AD, opening the way for steady Vietnamese movement
toward the MEKONG RIVER delta. When Vietnam was united in 1802, the
city of HUE became the capital, and the area was ruled by the emperor of
Annam. Central Vietnam gradually came under French control in the 19th
century; it became a protectorate in 1883–85, leaving the court at Hue
with only nominal power. The area was partitioned between North and
South Vietnam in 1954; Annam’s last emperor had abdicated in 1945 but
served as Vietnam’s chief of state from 1949 until shortly after partition.
Annan
anomie
Anshan
anteater Any of four species of toothless, insect-eating placental mam-
mals. Found in tropical savannas and forests from Mexico to northern
Argentina and Uruguay, anteaters have a long tail, dense fur, a long skull,
and a tubular muzzle. Their mouth opening is small, and the tongue is
long and wormlike. They live alone or in pairs and feed mainly on ants
and termites, which they obtain byinserting their st icky tongue into a nest
torn open by the long, sharp, curved claws of their forefeet. The species
range in length from 15 in. (37 cm) to 6 ft (1.8 m). Once grouped together,
anteaters are now considered as separate from ECHIDNAS and PANGOLINS.
Antelami
domestic heating, but today they have given way to other sources of
energy (e.g., natural gas and electricity).
anthracnose
antiballistic missile (ABM) Weapon designed to intercept and
destroy ballistic MISSILEs. Effective ABM systems have been sought since
the Cold War, when the nuclear arms race raised the spectre of complete
destruction by unstoppable ballistic missiles. In the late 1960s both the
U.S. and the Soviet Union developed nuclear-armed ABM systems that
combined a high-altitude interceptor missile (the U.S. Spartan and Soviet
Galosh) with a terminal-phase interceptor (the U.S. Sprint and Soviet
Gazelle). Both sides were limited by the 1972 Treaty on Antiballistic
Missile Systems to one ABM location each; the U.S. dismantled its sys-
tem, while the Soviet Union deployed one around Moscow. During the
1980s the U.S. began research on an ambitious STRATEGIC DEFENSE INITIATIVE
against an all-out Soviet attack, but this effort proved expensive and tech-
nically difficult, and it lost urgency with the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Attention shifted to “theatre” systems such as the U.S. Patriot missile,
which was used with limited effect against conventionally armed Iraqi
Scud missiles during the Persian Gulf War (1990–91). In 2002 the U.S.
formally withdrew from the ABM treaty in order to develop a defense
against limited missile attack by smaller powers or “rogue” states.
Antibes
Antigonus I Monophthalmus
18th-century writer LAURENCE STERNE. Writers of such works include NATH-
ALIE SARRAUTE, CLAUDE SIMON, ALAIN ROBBE-GRILLET, Uwe Johnson, and Rayner
Heppenstall.
Antioch
combination…or conspiracy in restraint of trade or commerce.” The Clay-
ton Antitrust Act of 1914, as amended in 1936 by the Robinson-Patman
Act, prohibits discrimination among customers through prices or other
means; it also prohibits mergers or acquisitions whenever the effect may
be “to substantially lessen competition.” Labour unions are also subject
to antitrust laws.
antlion Insect (family Myrmeleontidae) known in its larval stage for its
aggressive capture of prey. The ant-
lion LARVA digs a funnel-shaped
sandy pit by using its oval, bristled
abdomen, then buries itself in the pit
with only its powerful jaws uncov-
ered. Any small insect that ventures
over the pit’s edge slips to the bot-
tom and is seized by the antlion,
which sucks the contents of its vic-
tim and throws out the empty skin.
The adult antlion does not feed. The
best known of the 65 described spe-
cies occurs in North America and Europe.
Antofagasta
antyesti
Apamea Cibotus
with subjects for which principles and methodology developed relatively
late, including art, agriculture, medicine, jurisprudence, and politics, but
in the modern era they have usually been vehicles of wit and pithy wis-
dom. Celebrated modern aphorists include FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE and OSCAR
WILDE.
aphrodisiac
Apollo asteroid See EARTH-CROSSING ASTEROID
Apollo Theatre During and after the HARLEM RENAISSANCE, a centre of
African-American popular music on 125th Street in New York City’s
Harlem district. Built in 1914, it hosted musical performers such as BILL
ROBINSON, BILLIE HOLIDAY, BESSIE SMITH, ETHEL WATERS, DUKE ELLINGTON, and oth-
ers in the 1930s and ’40s; stars such as ELLA FITZGERALD, SARAH VAUGHAN,
and JAMES BROWN were discovered on Wednesday amateur nights. In the
1960s the Apollo featured soul artists such as the SUPREMES, STEVIE WON-
DER, and MARVIN GAYE. Converted into a movie theatre in 1975, it was
reopened as a performance venue in 1983.
Apollonius Dyscolos
Appalachian Mountains Mountain system, eastern North America.
The Appalachians, among the oldest mountains on Earth, extend almost
2,000 mi (3,200 km) from the Canadian province of Newfoundland and
Labrador in the northeast southwestward to Alabama in the U.S. They
include the WHITE MOUNTAINS in New Hampshire, the GREEN MOUNTAINS in
Vermont, the CATSKILL MOUNTAINS in New York, the ALLEGHENY MOUNTAINS
primarily in Pennsylvania, the BLUE RIDGE Mountains in Virginia and North
Carolina, the GREAT SMOKY MOUNTAINS in North Carolina and Tennessee,
and the CUMBERLAND PLATEAU extending from West Virginia to Alabama.
Their highest peak is Mount MITCHELL in North Carolina. See also APPA-
LACHIAN GEOSYNCLINE; APPALACHIAN NATIONAL SCENIC TRAIL.
Appalachian National Scenic Trail Footpath, APPALACHIAN MOUN-
Appalachian orogenic
PSYCHOLOGY, and community psychology. See also INDUSTRIAL-ORGANIZATIONAL
PSYCHOLOGY; PSYCHOMETRICS.
appliqué See QUILTING
Appomattox
PICASSO, GEORGES ROUAULT, and ANDRÉ MASSON.
aquavit
try until 2000. See also Y0SIR !ARAF0T; h0FI- AL-ASSAD; MENACHEM BEGIN;
DAVID BEN-GURION; CAMP DAVID ACCORDS; MOSHE DAYAN; HEZBOLLAH; GAMAL
ABDEL NASSER; YITZHAK RABIN; SABRA AND SHATILA MASSACRES; ANWAR EL-S0D0T.
Arab League or League of Arab States Regional organization
Arabia See ARABIAN PENINSULA
Arabian Desert Desert region,
RAY MANLEY—SHOSTAL ASSOC./EB INC.
Arabesque decoration on the dome of
the Madar-i-Sh)h madrasah (“school”)
built by husayn I, early 18th century, at
EÆfah)n, Iran
ARABIAN PENINSULA. It covers about
900,000 sq mi (2,330,000 sq km),
occupying nearly the entire penin-
sula. It lies largely within SAUDI ARA-
BIA but
large portions extend into
Jordan,
Iraq, Kuwait, Qatar,
United Arab Emirates, Oman, and
Yemen. Its relief is broken by a num-
ber of mountain ranges, with eleva-
tions reaching as high as 12,000 ft (3,700 m), and it is bounded on three
sides by high escarpments. At least one-third of the desert is covered by
sand, including the RUB! AL-KHALI, considered to have one of the most
inhospitable climates on Earth. There are no perennial bodies of water,
though the TIGRIS-EUPHRATES river system lies to the northeast and the Wadi
hajr is located to the south, in Yemen. Humans have inhabited the area
since Pleistocene times.
Arabian horse Earliest improved breed of HORSE, valued for its speed,
stamina, beauty, intelligence, and gentleness. Its long history has been
obscured by legend, but it was developed in Arabia by the 7th century AD.
It has contributed its qualities to most modern breeds of light horses. It
is compact and relatively small, with a small head, protruding eyes, wide
nostrils, marked withers, and a short back. Its average height is about 15
hands (60 in. [152 cm]), its average weight 800–1,000 lbs (360–450 kg).
Though many colours are possible, gray is the most common.
Arabian Nights’ Entertainment See The THOUSAND AND ONE NIGHTS
Arabian Peninsula or Arabia Peninsular region, southwest Asia.
With its offshore islands, it covers about 1 million sq mi (2.6 million sq
km). Constituent countries are Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, United
Arab Emirates, Yemen, and, the largest, Saudi Arabia. It is generally arid
and is covered almost entirely by the ARABIAN DESERT. The modern economy
is dominated by the production of petroleum and natural gas. The world’s
largest proven reserves of those minerals are in the Arabian Peninsula. Its
political consolidation was begun by the Prophet MUHAMMAD, and it was
the centre of the orthodox caliphate until 661, when that office passed to
the UMAYYAD DYNASTY in DAMASCUS. After 1517 much of the region was
dominated by the OTTOMAN EMPIRE, though the peninsula’s people, who had
remained largely tribal and nomadic, revolted repeatedly until the World
War I (1914–18), when the Ottoman Empire dissolved. Thereafter, indi-
vidual nation-states followed their own histories, though many maintained
close ties with European powers such as the United Kingdom.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Arab League (cid:2) Arabic philosophy
some TURKIC languages, MALAY, SWAHILI, and HAUSA. The MALTESE LANGUAGE
Arabic philosophy or Islamic philosophy Doctrines of the Ara-
Spaniard AVERROËS, whose interpretations of ARISTOTLE were taken up by
both Jewish and Christian thinkers. Muslims, Christians, and Jews par-
ticipated in the Arabic tradition and separated themselves according to
philosophic rather than religious doctrines. When the Arabs dominated
Spain, the Arabic philosophic literature was translated into Hebrew and
Latin; this contributed to the development of modern European philoso-
phy. In Egypt around the same time, the Arabic tradition was developed
by MOSES MAIMONIDES and IBN KHALDUN.
Arachne
an alphabet of Phoenician origin found in the northern Levant dating from
c. 850 to 600 BC. The period 600–200 BC saw a dramatic expansion of
Aramaic, leading to the development of a standard form known as Impe-
rial Aramaic. In later centuries, as “Standard Literary Aramaic,” it became
a linguistic model. Late (or Classical) Aramaic (c. AD 200–1200) has an
abundant literature, both in Syriac and in Mandaic (see MANDAEANISM).
With the rise of Islam, Arabic rapidly supplanted Aramaic as a vernacu-
lar in South Asia. Modern Aramaic (Neo-Aramaic) comprises West Neo-
Aramaic, spoken in three villages northeast of Damascus, Syria, and East
Neo-Aramaic, a group of languages spoken in scattered settlements of
Jews and Christians in southeastern Turkey, northern Iraq, and northwest-
ern Iran, and by modern Mandaeans in the SHA’’ AL-!ARAB. Since c. 1900
persecution has forced most contemporary East Neo-Aramaic-speakers,
who number several hundred thousand, into diaspora communities around
the world.
Aramco
arboretum
archaebacteria
archetype
of the area within which, for one day or more each year, the sun does not
set or rise. The length of continuous day or night increases northward from
the Arctic Circle, mounting to six months at the NORTH POLE.
Arctic fox Northern FOX (Alopex lagopus) found throughout the Arctic,
usually on tundra or mountains near the sea. Its short, rounded ears and
short muzzle reduce its body area exposed to heat loss, and it has fur-
covered soles. It is 20–24 in. (50–60 cm) long (excluding the 12-in., or
30-cm, tail) and weighs 7–17 lbs (3–8 kg). It has two colour phases. Indi-
viduals in the white phase are grayish brown in summer and white in win-
ter; those in the blue phase (blue foxes of the fur trade) are grayish in
summer and gray-blue in winter. The Arctic fox dwells in burrows and
feeds on any available animal or vegetable material.
Arctic National Park, Gates of the See GATES OF THE ARCTIC
NATIONAL PARK
Arctic Ocean Ocean centring approximately on the NORTH POLE. Small-
est of the world’s oceans, it is almost completely surrounded by the land-
masses of Eurasia and North America, and it is distinguished by a cover
of ice. Lands in it and adjacent to it include Point Barrow in Alaska, the
ARCTIC ARCHIPELAGO, GREENLAND, SVALBARD, FRANZ JOSEF LAND, and northern
explorers included ROALD AMUNDSEN, FRIDTJOF NANSEN, ROBERT E. PEAR Y, and
RICHARD E. BYRD. Development of the area’s natural resources was spurred
by the discovery of oil in Alaska in the 1960s. Virtually all of the Arctic
has now been mapped. See map opposite.
Arctic tern TERN species (Sterna paradisaea) that makes the longest
annual migration of any bird. It breeds in the southerly reaches of the
Arctic and winters in the Antarctic, making its migration a round-trip of
nearly 22,000 mi (over 35,000 km). Its appearance—white with a black
cap and grayish wings—is similar to that of the common tern (S. hirundo),
its frequent companion.
Ardea
traced TOTALITARIANISM to 19th-century ANTI-SEMITISM, IMPERIALISM, and the dis-
integration of the traditional nation-state. Her highly controversial book
Eichmann in Jerusalem (1963) argued that the Nazi war criminal ADOLF
EICHMANN was not inwardly wicked or depraved but merely “thoughtless”;
his role in the extermination of the Jews thus epitomized the fearsome
“banality of evil” that had swept across Europe at the time. Resuming
contact with Heidegger in 1950, she claimed that his involvement with
the Nazis had been the “mistake” of a great philosopher. She taught at the
University of Chicago (1963–67) and thereafter at the New School for
Social Research in New York City.
Areopagus
Argerich
Arjan
Armageddon
Armenia, Little See LITTLE ARMENIA
AND EMPIRE and later from the BYZANTINE EMPIRE, the SELJãQ DYNASTY, the OTTO-
Armenian Secret Army to Liberate Armenia See ASALA
Armistice (Nov. 11, 1918) Agreement between Germany and the Allies
ending WORLD WAR I. Allied representatives met with a German delega-
tion in a railway carriage at Rethondes, France, to discuss terms. The
agreement was signed on Nov. 11, 1918, and the war ended at 11:00 AM
that day (“the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month”). The prin-
cipal term was that Germany would evacuate Belgium, France, and
Alsace-Lorraine. Negotiations formalizing the armistice were conducted
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Armenia (cid:2) Armour
at the PARIS PEACE CONFERENCE. Later a “stab in the back” legend developed
in Germany, asserting that the German military situation had not been
hopeless and that traitorous politicians had done the Allies’ bidding by
signing the Armistice.
Armory Show formally International Exhibition of Modern
Art Exhibition of painting and sculpture held in 1913 at the 69th Regi-
ment Armory in New York City. Conceived by its organizers, the Asso-
ciation of American Painters and Sculptors, as a selection of works
exclusively by U.S. artists, it evolved into a comprehensive look at cur-
rent European art movements, due in part to the advanced vision of asso-
ciation president Arthur B. Davies. Of the 1,300 works assembled, one-
third were European, tracing the evolution of modern art from FRANCISCO
DE GOYA to MARCEL DUCHAMP and VASILY KANDINSKY, with works representa-
tive of IMPRESSIONISM, SYMBOLISM, POST-IMPRESSIONISM, FAUVISM, and CUBISM.
Suit of 15th-century European plate armour.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
106 I armoured vehicle (cid:2) Arne
HAGUE CONVENTION (1899). The WASHINGTON CONFERENCE (1921–22) and the
KELLOGG-BRIAND PACT (1928) were broken without much fear of sanction.
U.S.-Soviet treaties to control nuclear weapons during the COLD WAR were
taken more seriously. In 1968 the two superpowers and Britain sponsored
the NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY (signed also by 59 other countries),
which committed signatory countries not to promote the spread, or pro-
liferation, of nuclear weapons to countries that did not already possess
them. See also NUCLEAR TEST-BAN TREATY; STRATEGIC ARMS LIMITATION TALKS; STRA-
TEGIC ARMS REDUCTION TALKS.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Orleans, he participated in marching,
riverboat, and cabaret bands. A child-
hood nickname, Satchelmouth, was
shortened to Satchmo and used
throughout his life. In 1922 he moved
to Chicago to join KING OLIVER’s Cre-
ole Jazz Band (see DIXIELAND). In 1924
he joined the FLETCHER HENDERSON
AP/WIDE WORLD PHOTOS
Louis Armstrong.
Neil Armstrong, 1969.
also AIR FORCE, CONSCRIPTION, GUERRILLA, MILITAR Y UNIT, MILITIA, U.S. ARMY.
Arnhem
to a class of HYDROCARBONs isolated from coal tar and distinguished by
odours much stronger than those of other classes of hydrocarbons. In
modern chemistry, aromaticity denotes the chemical behaviour, especially
the low reactivity, of this class of molecules related to their bonding. The
parent compound of this class is BENZENE (C6H6). See also HYDROGENATION.
arsenic poisoning Harmful
effects of ARSENIC compounds (in pesticides, chemotherapy drugs, paints,
etc.), most often from INSECTICIDE exposure. Susceptibility varies. Arsenic
is believed to combine with certain enzymes, interfering with cellular
metabolism. Symptoms of acute arsenic poisoning include nausea and
abdominal pain followed by circulatory collapse. Acute exposure to the
gas arsine causes destruction of red blood cells and kidney damage;
chronic exposure causes weakness, skin disorders, anemia, and nervous-
system disorders. Arsenic in urine and hair or nails is the key to diagno-
sis. Treatment
involves washing out
the stomach and promptly
administering the antidote dimercaprol.
Arsinoe
Art Nouveau
arthritis
with the rail line passing through the Otira Tunnel (5.3 mi [8.6 km]).
Arthur’s Pass National Park was created in 1929.
Artibonite River
arugula
greatly exacerbates its symptoms. LUNG CANCER and malignant mesothe-
lioma are more common with asbestos inhalation and asbestosis.
Ascalon See ASHQELON
Ascanius
accused by the Mu!tazilah of believing in predestination because they
claimed the human capacity for action was only acquired at the very
moment of action.
Ashbery, John (Lawrence) (b. July 28, 1927, Rochester, N.Y., U.S.)
U.S. poet. He earned degrees from Harvard and Columbia universities
and subsequently became known as an art critic. His poems, noted for
their elegance, originality, and obscurity, are characterized by arresting
images, exquisite rhythms, intricate form, and sudden shifts in tone and
subject. His collections include The Double Dream of Spring (1970),
Self-Portrait in a Convex Mirror (1975, Pulitzer Prize, National Book
Award), A Wave (1984), Flow Chart (1991), and Wakefulness (1998).
Ashcroft, Dame Peggy orig. Edith Margaret Emily Ashcroft
Ashgabat
Ashurbanipal
aspartame
assaying
were placed on reservations. Some
3,900 people claimed sole Assini-
boin descent in the 2000 U.S. census.
There
somewhat
fewer
Canada.
Assiniboine
and Elath. Astarte shared many qualities, and perhaps a common origin,
with her sister ANATH. The goddess of love and war, Astarte was worshiped
in Egypt and in Canaan, as well as among the Hittites. Her Akkadian
counterpart was ISHTAR. She is often mentioned in the Bible under the name
Ashtaroth; SOLOMON is said to have worshipped the goddess, and JOSIAH
destroyed the shrines dedicated to her. In Egypt she was assimilated with
ISIS and HATHOR; in the Greco-Roman world she was assimilated with APH-
RODITE, ARTEMIS, and JUNO.
OID; TROJAN ASTEROIDS.
asthenosphere
GAMMA-RAY ASTRONOMY; INFRARED ASTRONOMY; RADIO AND RADAR ASTRONOMY;
ULTRAVIOLET ASTRONOMY; X-RAY ASTRONOMY.
astrophysics Branch of ASTRONOMY concerned mainly with the proper-
ties and structures of cosmic objects, including the universe as a whole.
Starting in the 19th century, SPECTROSCOPY and photography were applied
to astronomical research, making it possible to study the brightness, tem-
perature, and chemical composition of cosmic objects. It was soon real-
ized that the properties of these bodies could be fully understood only in
terms of the physics of their atmospheres and interiors. X-RAY ASTRONOMY,
GAMMA-RAY ASTRONOMY, INFRARED ASTRONOMY, ULTRAVIOLET ASTRONOMY, and RADIO
AND RADAR ASTRONOMY are all basically concerned with extending electro-
magnetic coverage beyond the visible spectrum to constrain the physical
characteristics of astronomical objects.
Astruc
Atacama
Athabaskan languages or Athapaskan languages Family
Athanasius
there were 40 monasteries. Long regarded as the holy mountain of the
GREEK ORTHODOX CHURCH, it was declared a theocratic republic in 1927. Its
churches and libraries house a rich collection of Byzantine art and ancient
and medieval manuscripts.
Athyr See HATHOR
Atitlán
Atlas, Charles orig. Angelo Siciliano (b. Oct. 30, 1893, Acri,
atman
Aton or Aten
also HYDROGEN BOMB; NUCLEAR NON-
PROLIFERATION TREATY; NUCLEAR WEAPON.
atomic number Number of a
QUANTUM MECHANICS and QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS. The primary tools for the
sonal atonement (see CONFESSION). In Judaism the annual Day of Atone-
ment, YOM KIPPUR, is the culmination of 10 days centered on repentance.
Atonement, Day of See YOM KIPPUR
ATP in full adenosine triphosphate
Attica Greek Attiki
augite
IGOR STRAVINSKY.
Audubon, John James orig. Fougère Rabin or Jean Rabin
later Jean-Jacques Fougère Audubon (b. April 26, 1785, Les
Augustine
Aurelian
Australian Aboriginal languages Group of perhaps as many as
500 languages spoken by the 300,000 to 1,000,000 native inhabitants of
Australia before the beginning of European conquest in 1788. More than
half are now extinct; of the remainder, only about 20, mostly in the North
Territory and northern Western Australia, remain in active use by both
adults and children. Most Australian languages belong to a single super-
family, Pama-Nyungan, and the remainder, a very diverse group of lan-
guages spoken in the Kimberley region of Western Australia and parts of
the North Territory, may be remotely akin to Pama-Nyungan.
Australian Aborigine
Austerlitz, Battle of (Dec. 2, 1805) First engagement of the War of
the Third Coalition and one of NAPOLEON’s greatest victories. In the battle,
fought near Austerlitz in Moravia (now Slavkov u Brna, Czech Rep.),
Napoleon’s 68,000 troops defeated almost 90,000 Russians and Austrians
under Russia’s ALEXANDER I and MIKHAIL KUTUZOV. Also called the Battle of
the Three Emperors, Napoleon’s resounding victory forced Austria’s
FRANCIS I to conclude the Treaty of Pressburg, ceding Venetia to the French
kingdom in Italy and temporarily ending the anti-French alliance. See also
NAPOLEONIC WARS.
Australian National University Public university in Canberra,
Australopithecus
REMAINS;
HUMAN EVOLUTION; LAETOLI FOOTPRINTS;
LUCY; OLDUVAI GORGE; STERKFONTEIN.
Austrasia
of Italy in 1882 made it the TRIPLE ALLIANCE. The agreement remained an
important element of both German and Austro-Hungarian foreign policy
until 1918.
Austro-Hungarian Empire See AUSTRIA-HUNGAR Y
Austro-Prussian War See SEVEN WEEKS’ WAR
Austroasiatic languages Superfamily of about 150 languages spo-
ken by close to 90 million physically and culturally very diverse people
in South and Southeast Asia. Today most scholars believe that it is sub-
divided into two families, MUNDA and MON-KHMER. The present fragmented
distribution of Austroasiatic languages is most likely the result of rela-
tively
recent
incursions
AUSTRONESIAN-speaking peoples. In prehistoric times Austroasiatic lan-
guages most likely extended over a much broader and more continuous
area, including much of what is now southeastern China. Other than VIET-
NAMESE and KHMER, no Austroasiatic language is an official national lan-
guage.
INDO-AR YAN, SINO-TIBETAN,
Austronesian languages formerly Malayo-Polynesian lan-
auteur
See also AXLE, BRAKE, BUS, CARBURETOR, ELECTRIC AUTOMOBILE, FUEL INJECTION, MOTOR-
CYCLE, TRUCK.
automobile racing Sport practiced in a variety of forms on roads,
tracks, or closed circuits. It includes GRAND PRIX RACING, speedway racing
(including the INDIANAPOLIS 500), STOCK-CAR RACING, SPORTS-CAR RACING, DRAG
RACING, midget-car racing, and KARTING, as well as hill climbs and RALLY DRIV-
ING. The International Motor Sports Hall of Fame is located in Talladega,
Ala., U.S. There is no central governing body for automobile racing in
the U.S. as there is in most other countries.
autonomic
paya founded the Konbaung dynasty in the 18th century, Ava served as
its capital for a time, and even after the dynasty built Amarapura and
Mandalay, its seat was often referred to as the “Court of Ava.”
avalanche Large mass of material, such as snow or rock debris, that
moves rapidly down a mountain slope, sweeping everything in its path.
Avalanches begin when a mass of material overcomes the frictional resis-
tance of the sloping surface, often after the material’s foundation has been
weakened by rains or the snow has been partially melted by a warm, dry
wind. Other weather conditions that can lead to avalanches are heavy
snowfall and high winds. A common method of avalanche control con-
sists of detonating explosives in the upper reaches of avalanche zones,
which intentionally causes the snow to slide before accumulations have
become very great.
Avalokitesvara
to spiritual leaders; Vendidad, the main source for Zoroastrian law; the
Yashts, 21 hymns to angels and ancient heroes; and the Khurda avesta,
composed of minor texts.
Avestan
AWACS
Aying or A Ying
Turks, and Iranians. Russia acquired what
is now independent Azerbaijan in the early
19th century. After the RUSSIAN REVOLUTION
OF 1917, Azerbaijan declared its indepen-
dence; it was subdued by the Red Army in
1920 and was incorporated into the Soviet Union. It declared indepen-
dence from the collapsing Soviet Union in 1991. Azerbaijan has two geo-
graphic peculiarities. The exclave Naxçivan (Nakhichevan) is separated
from the rest of Azerbaijan by Armenian territory. NAGORNO-KARABAKH,
which lies within Azerbaijan and is administered by it, has a Christian
Armenian majority. Azerbaijan and Armenia went to war over both ter-
ritories in the 1990s, causing many deaths and great economic disruption.
Though attempts at mediation were made, the political situation remained
unresolved.
Azhar
Baader-Meinhof Gang
Babel
Bacchanalia
Babylonian Exile or Babylonian Captivity Forced detention of
Bacall, Lauren orig. Betty Joan Perske (b. Sept. 6, 1924, New
Bacharach
bacteremia
Badoglio
Baganda See GANDA
bagasse
Bahia
Bailly
Bakhtin
Cardigan swept down the valley after the retreating Russian cavalry. The
battle ended with the loss of 40% of the Light Brigade and inspired the
1855 poem “Charge of the Light Brigade” by Alfred, Lord TENNYSON.
balalaika
baldachin
Balearic
LIBERTIES UNION (ACLU). As
Baldwin (of Bewdley), Stan-
ley Baldwin, 1st Earl (b. Aug.
ish anticipated gaining a mandate over Palestine after World War I (1914–
18) and hoped to win over Jewish public opinion to the side of the Allies.
They also hoped that pro-British settlers would help protect
approaches to the SUEZ CANAL, a vital link to Britain’s South Asian pos-
sessions.
LET RUSSE DE MONTE CARLO; BALLETS RUSSES; BOLSHOI BALLET; NEW YORK CITY BAL-
LET; ROYAL BALLET.
Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo
Ballymena
rated as constituent republics. In 1944 Soviet troops recovered the terri-
tory overrun by German forces in 1941. The Baltic states gained
independence on the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991.
Baltimore, David (b. March 7, 1938, New York, N.Y., U.S.) U.S.
virologist. He received his doctorate from the Rockefeller Institute. He
and Howard Temin (1934–94), working independently, discovered an
enzyme that synthesizes DNA from RNA, the reverse of the usual pro-
cess. This enzyme, reverse transcriptase, has become an invaluable tool
in recombinant DNA technology. The research of Baltimore, Temin, and
RENATO DULBECCO helped illuminate the role of viruses in cancer; the three
men shared a Nobel Prize in 1975. In 1990 Baltimore became president
of Rockefeller University; in 1997 he became president of the California
Institute of Technology.
Baltimore (of Baltimore), George Calvert, 1st Baron (b.
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad (B&O) First steam-operated rail-
way in the U.S. to be chartered as a common carrier of freight and pas-
sengers (1827). The B&O was established by Baltimore merchants to
foster trade with the West. By 1852 the railroad extended to Wheeling,
Va. (now W.V.), and in the next two decades it reached Chicago, Ill., and
St. Louis, Mo. The B&O’s long-distance passenger trains were discon-
tinued in 1971 after AMTRAK was established. Many of B&O’s operations
were assumed by the CSX Corp. in 1980.
Baltimore Sun Daily newspaper published in Baltimore, Md., U.S. It
was begun as a four-page penny tabloid in 1837 by Arunah Shepherdson
Abell, a journeyman printer from Rhode Island. Known through much of
its history for its coverage of national and international news, the paper
was run by Abell’s family until 1910, when control passed to a group of
Baltimore businessmen,
including H. Crawford Black. Members of
Black’s family were chairmen of the board until 1984. In 1986 the Sun
was acquired by the Times Mirror Company, which in turn was acquired
by the Tribune Company in 2000. Author H.L. MENCKEN was for years
prominently associated with the Sun.
Baluba See LUBA
Baluchistan See BALOCHISTAN
Balzac
the town of Banbridge, established in 1712; it is the district seat and the
main agricultural and population centre of the region.
Banco, Nanni di See NANNI DI BANCO
ING AND GATHERING SOCIETY; SOCIOCULTURAL EVOLUTION.
Banda, Hastings (Kamuzu)
Bandama
Bandinelli, Baccio (b. Nov. 12, 1493?, Florence—d. Feb. 7, 1560,
Florence) Italian sculptor and painter active in Florence. Though trained
as a goldsmith by his father, he soon became one of the principal sculp-
tors at the MEDICI court. He often failed to complete his commissions and
was accused of jealousy and incompetence by BENVENUTO CELLINI and GIOR-
GIO VASARI. He is remembered more for accounts of his unattractive char-
acter than for the quality of his work, although surviving works prove
him to have been a more distinguished sculptor than his contemporaries
allowed. His most famous sculpture is Hercules and Cacus (1534), in the
Piazza della Signoria.
Bandung
Bangor Town (pop., 1991: 52,437), seat of NORTH DOWN district, North-
ern Ireland. It lies on the southern shore of Belfast Lough, 12 mi (19 km)
northeast of BELFAST. St. Comgall founded a monastery at Bangor c. 555,
which became a celebrated seat of learning. The town was sacked by the
Danes in the 9th century; it was partially rebuilt by St. Malachy in the
12th century. It is now a seaside resort.
Bangui
Bann)#
severely repressed all opposition. His restrictions of union activities and
constitutional liberties led to opposition by labour, the clergy, peasants,
and students. A 1978 coup d’état overthrew him, but he was democrati-
cally elected in 1997. He resigned in 2001.
Bao Dai
Baraka
barbet
Episcopal church leaders as St. Stevens, an Episcopal college for men.
The name was changed to Bard College in 1934. Between 1928 and 1944
it served as COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY’s undergraduate school. It became coedu-
cational in 1944. Its undergraduate curriculum includes courses in the
social sciences, languages and literature, arts, and natural sciences and
mathematics.
Bardeen, John (b. May 23, 1908, Madison, Wis., U.S.—d. Jan. 30,
1991, Boston, Mass.) U.S. physicist. He earned a Ph.D. in mathematical
physics from Princeton University. He worked for the U.S. Naval Ord-
nance Laboratory during World War II, after which he worked for Bell
Telephone Laboratories. His work there led to his sharing a 1956 Nobel
Prize with WILLIAM B. SHOCKLEY and WALTER H. BRATTAIN for the invention of
the TRANSISTOR. In 1972 he again shared a Nobel Prize, this time with LEON
COOPER and J. Robert Schrieffer for developing the theory of SUPERCON-
DUCTIVITY (1957); this theory (called the BCS theory, for Bardeen-Cooper-
Schrieffer) is the basis for all later theoretical work in superconductivity.
Bardeen was also the author of a theory explaining certain properties of
SEMICONDUCTORS.
Bardesanes
from naturalistic and stylized representations of human and animal forms
to mythical beings, spirals, circles, and abstract motifs.
Barker, Harley Granville- See Harley GRANVILLE-BARKER
barking deer See MUNTJAC
Barkley, Alben W(illiam) (b. Nov. 24, 1877, Graves county, Ky.,
U.S.—d. April 30, 1956, Lexington, Va.) U.S. politician. After graduat-
ing from college, he studied law and was admitted to the Kentucky bar
in 1901. He was elected as a Democrat to the U.S. House of Represen-
tatives (1913–27) and the Senate (1927–49), where he served as majority
leader (1937–47). He was a prominent spokesman for the domestic and
international policies of Pres. FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT. He served as vice
president under Pres. HARR Y S. TRUMAN (1949–53). He later returned to the
Senate (1954–56).
Barkley, Charles (Wade) (b. Feb. 20, 1963, Leeds, Ala., U.S.) U.S.
basketball player. He spent his collegiate career as a forward at Auburn
University. He played for the Philadelphia 76ers (1984–91), the Phoenix
Suns (1992–95), and the Houston Rockets (1996–99). He is known for
his bruising play on the court and for his outspokenness off it.
Barlach
Barnard’s
RIGUERESQUE.
tal genres as OPERA, ORATORIO, CANTATA, SONATA, and CONCERTO were intro-
duced and such towering composers as CLAUDIO MONTEVERDI, J.S. BACH, and
Barotse See LOZI
Barquisimeto
Barth, John orig. John Simmons Barth, Jr. (b. May 27, 1930,
Cambridge, Md., U.S.) U.S. writer. Barth grew up on Maryland’s eastern
shore, the locale of much of his writing, and from 1953 he taught prin-
cipally at Johns Hopkins University. Apart from the experimental pieces
in Lost in the Funhouse (1968), his best-known works are the novels The
Floating Opera (1956), The End of the Road (1958), The Sot-Weed Fac-
tor (1960), Giles Goat-Boy (1966), and The Tidewater Tales (1987), most
of which play with and parody traditional narrative forms, combining
philosophical depth with biting satire and boisterous, often bawdy
humour. In 2001 he published the experimental novel Coming Soon!!!: A
Narrative, which was not well received.
Barth
he published the work for which he is best known, Familiar Quotations,
based largely on a notebook he kept for his customers. It was greatly
expanded in later editions; the 17th edition appeared in 2002. He also
wrote a complete concordance to Shakespeare’s dramatic works and
poems (1894), outstanding for the number and fullness of its citations.
Bartók
also ACID-BASE THEOR Y; ALKALI; NUCLEO-
PHILE.
Basel
The Narrow Road to the Deep North (1694), a poetic prose travelogue,
is one of the loveliest works of Japanese literature.
BASIC in full Beginner’s All-purpose Symbolic Instruction
Code Computer PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE developed by JOHN G. KEMENY and
Thomas E. Kurtz (b. 1928) at Dartmouth College in the mid 1960s. One
of the simplest high-level languages, with commands similar to English,
it can be learned with relative ease even by schoolchildren and novice
programmers. Since c. 1980, BASIC has been popular for use on PERSONAL
COMPUTERS.
Basic Input/Output System See BIOS
basic rocks See ACID AND BASIC ROCKS
basidiomycete
later it followed the variable fortunes of the Kingdom of NAPLES until united
with the Kingdom of Italy in 1861. The region suffered severe damage in a
disastrous earthquake in 1980. Agriculture is an economic mainstay.
Basilides
torical region, northern Spain. Bounded by the Bay of BISCAY, it consists
of the modern provinces of Vizcaya (Biscay), Álava, and Guipúzcoa and
has an area of 2,793 sq mi (7,234 sq km); its capital is VITORIA-GASTEIZ.
The Pyrenees Mountains separate it from the BASQUE COUNTR Y OF FRANCE.
The BASQUEs who inhabit the region have long sought autonomy. A sepa-
ratist movement succeeded in regaining Basque autonomy in 1936 under
the short-lived Republican government, but autonomy was withdrawn by
FRANCISCO FRANCO in 1937. Though limited autonomy was granted in 1979,
a campaign of terrorism against the Spanish government continued. Álava
is an agricultural region, while metallurgical industry is concentrated
around BILBAO.
Basque Country French Pays Basque
Bat Mitzvah See BAR MITZVAH
Bataan Death March
The coastline is fringed with islets, and several islands stretch from its
western tip. Discovered in 1819 by Sir William Parry, it was named for
Henry Bathurst, 3rd Earl Bathurst.
bathypelagic zone
vision news, which reports about important events in the world but at the
same time makes events important by reporting about them. In The Gulf
War Did Not Take Place (1991), he contended that the mass-media por-
trayal of the 1991 war in the Persian Gulf had made that event “unreal.”
See also POSTMODERNISM.
Baugh
Bayeux
182 I BBC (cid:2) bean
BBS See BULLETIN-BOARD SYSTEM
Beach, Amy Marcy orig. Amy Marcy Cheney known as Mrs.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Beagle
SALLY ANNE THOMPSON/EB INC.
Beagle
Channel
bearing wall or load-bearing wall Wall that carries the load of
Béarn
BROWN BEAR; SUN BEAR.
Beaton, Sir Cecil (Walter Hardy) (b. Jan. 14, 1904, London,
Beatrix
Beaumont
painted decorations for the Siena town hall (1529–35) and executed
designs for the marble pavement of Siena Cathedral. He is considered the
outstanding Sienese painter of the MANNERIST style.
Beccaria
Becknell
beehive tomb or tholos
BUMBLEBEE.
ARD STRAUSS and FREDERICK DELIUS.
Beerbohm, Sir (Henry) Max(imilian) (b. Aug. 24, 1872, London,
Beethoven
behaviour therapy or behaviour modification Application of
experimentally derived principles of LEARNING to the treatment of psycho-
logical disorders and the control of behaviour. The concept, which has its
roots in the work of EDWARD L. THORNDIKE, was popularized in the U.S. by
theorists of BEHAVIOURISM, including B.F. SKINNER. Behaviour-therapy tech-
niques are based on the principle of operant CONDITIONING, in which desired
behaviours are rewarded. There is little or no concern for conscious expe-
rience or unconscious processes. Such techniques have been applied with
some success to disturbances such as ENURESIS, TICs, PHOBIAs, STUTTERING,
Béjart
COMO PUCCINI.
Belau See PALAU
Belém
Belhadj
bell curve See NORMAL DISTRIBUTION
WILLIAM B. SHOCKLEY, for inventing the TRANSISTOR; and ARNO PENZIAS and
ROBERT W. WILSON, for discovering cosmic microwave background radia-
tion. It operates today in some 20 countries.
Bell palsy See PARALYSIS
bell ringing See CHANGE RINGING
Bella, Ahmed Ben See Ahmed BEN BELLA
Bellamy
Bell, Cool Papa orig. James Thomas Bell (b. May 17, 1903,
Bell Burnell, (Susan) Jocelyn orig. Susan Jocelyn Bell (b. July
15, 1943, Belfast, N.Ire.) British astronomer. As a research assistant at the
Bellerophon
Belmopan
See also MOHAMED BOUDIAF; HOUARI BOUMEDIENNE.
Ben-Gurion
benefice
professor of canon law, he was named a cardinal in 1375. When the WEST-
ERN SCHISM began in 1378, he supported the antipope Clement VII. Elected
pope at Avignon (see AVIGNON PAPACY), he refused French pressure to abdi-
cate and was besieged in the papal palace (1398). Benedict escaped to
Provence in 1403 and won back the obedience of France. He refused to
yield when deposed by the Councils of Pisa (1409) and Constance (1417).
Benedict XIV orig. Prospero Lambertini (b. March 31, 1675,
Benedict XV orig. Giacomo Della Chiesa (b. Nov. 21, 1854, Pegli,
Kingdom of Sardinia—d. Jan. 22,
1922, Rome, Italy) Pope (1914–22).
Ordained a priest in 1878, he entered
the papal diplomatic service. He was
made archbishop of Bologna in 1907
and cardinal in 1914. Elected pope a
month after the outbreak of World
War I, he tried to follow a policy of
strict neutrality and concentrated the
church’s efforts on relief. He later
made positive efforts toward reestab-
lishing peace, though his principal
attempt in 1917 to mediate the war
was unsuccessful.
Benedict XVI orig. Joseph
Alois Ratzinger (b. April 16,
Bengali
Benois
Bennett, Michael orig. Michael Bennett Difiglia (b. April 8,
1943, Buffalo, N.Y., U.S.—d. July 2, 1987, Tucson, Ariz.) U.S. dancer,
choreographer, and stage musical director. He began dancing at age three
and left high school to tour in a production of West Side Story. His major
contribution to dance was as choreographer-director of Broadway musi-
cals such as Promises, Promises (1968), Company (1970), Follies (1971),
and Dreamgirls (1981). His most remarkable musical was A Chorus Line
(1975, Pulitzer Prize), which he conceived, directed, and choreographed.
Bennett personally received eight Tony awards during his career.
Bennett (of Mickleham and of Calgary and Hopewell),
Richard Bedford Bennett, Viscount (b. July 3, 1870, Hopewell,
N.B., Can.—d. June 27, 1947, Mickleham, Surrey, Eng.) Canadian prime
minister (1930–35). Bennett was admitted to the bar in 1893 and prac-
ticed in New Brunswick. He then moved west and served in the legisla-
tures of the Northwest Territories and Alberta and in the Canadian House
of Commons (1911). He was named director general of national service
(1916) and later minister of justice (1921). He became head of the Con-
servative Party in 1927 and, promising relief from the Great Depression,
prime minister in 1930. But he underestimated the severity of the crisis,
and his measures were ineffective. He was defeated by the Liberals under
W.L. MACKENZIE KING. In 1939 he retired to England, where he was made
a viscount in 1941.
Bennett, Tony orig. Anthony (Dominick) Benedetto (b. Aug.
Benue-Congo
Bentinck, William (Henry Cavendish), Lord (b. Sept. 14, 1774,
HART BENTON.
Benton, Thomas Hart (b. April
Beowulf
Bergerac, Savinien Cyrano de See Savinien CYRANO DE BERGERAC
Bergey
Berkeley, Busby orig. William Berkeley Enos (b. Nov. 29, 1895,
Berkeley
Berlinguer
the story of a young priest’s war against sin. Dialogues of the Carmelites
(1949), a screenplay about 16 nuns martyred during the French Revolution,
was the basis for an opera by FRANCIS POULENC (1957).
Bernard
other contributions to Rome are his
Triton Fountain and Fountain of the
Four Rivers, noted for their architec-
tural composition and detail.
Bernoulli
Berry, Jean de France, duke de (b. Nov. 30, 1340, Vincennes,
France—d. June 15, 1416, Paris) French nobleman and patron of the arts.
He was the son of King JOHN II. As duke de Berry and Auvergne, he con-
trolled at least one-third of France during the middle period of the HUN-
DRED YEARS’ WAR. Berry shared in the administration of France and worked
for peace with England and within France, acting as diplomat and media-
tor. He invested fortunes in the art treasures that became his monument—
paintings, tapestries, jewelry, and illuminated manuscripts that included
the famous Très Riches Heures du duc de Berry.
Berry
Berzelius
German politician and chancellor (1909–17). A member of the civil ser-
vice, he was appointed Prussian minister of the interior in 1905 and
became German chancellor in 1909. Before World War I, he allowed the
militarist factions to dominate the government; in 1914 he supported a
“blank check” to Austria-Hungary for measures against Serbia. In 1916
he tried to secure the mediation of the U.S. to end the war, but he also
failed to restrict submarine warfare. In 1917 he angered conservatives by
promises of electoral reforms in Prussia and was forced to resign.
Bethune
Bezos
bhiksu
Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali (b. Jan. 5, 1928, near Larkana, Sindh, India—d.
April 4, 1979, Rawalpindi, Pak.) President (1971–73) and prime minister
(1973–77) of Pakistan. Son of a prominent politician, he was educated in
India, the U.S., and Britain. He served eight years in the government of
Mohammad Ayub Khan (1907–74) then resigned to form the Pakistan
People’s Party (1967). After the overthrow of the Ayub Khan regime and
the Pakistani civil war, Bhutto became president (1971). He nationalized
several key industries and taxed landed families. He became prime min-
ister in 1973, and his government, retaining martial law, began a process
of Islamization. Bhutto’s party won elections in 1977, but the opposition
accused him of electoral fraud. Gen. ZIA-UL-HAQ seized power and had
Bhutto imprisoned and later executed. BENAZIR BHUTTO is his daughter.
Biafra
Bibliothèque Nationale de France
Biedermeier
Bihar
big tree or giant sequoia or Sierra redwood Coniferous EVER-
GREEN (Sequoiadendron giganteum; see CONIFER) found in scattered groves
on the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada range of California, U.S. The
largest of all trees in bulk, the big tree is distinguished from the coastal
REDWOOD (Sequoia sempervirens) by having uniformly scalelike, or awl-
shaped, leaves that lie close against the branches, scaleless winter buds,
and cones requiring two seasons to mature. The pyramidal tree shape,
reddish brown furrowed bark, and drooping branches are common to both
genera. The largest specimen (in total bulk) is the General Sherman tree
in SEQUOIA NATIONAL PARK—101.5 ft (31 m) in circumference at its base,
272.4 ft (83 m) tall, and weighing an estimated 6,167 tons (5,593 metric
tons). Because big-tree lumber is more brittle than redwood lumber and
thus less desirable, the big tree has been easier to preserve; though some
groves have been cut, most of the 70 remaining groves are now protected
by state or national forests or parks.
Bigfoot or Sasquatch Large, hairy, humanlike creature that report-
edly lives in isolated areas of the northwestern U.S. and western Canada.
Descriptions of Bigfoot are similar to those of the ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN
of the Himalayas. It is said to be a primate 6–15 ft (2–4.5 m)in he ight,
walking upright and either moving silently or emitting a high-pitched cry.
Supposed footprints (some are hoaxes) have measured up to 24 in. (60
cm) in length. Despite many reported sightings, there is still no solid evi-
dence that Bigfoot exists.
bighorn or mountain sheep Stocky, climbing hoofed mammal
(Ovis canadensis) of western North
America. Both sexes have horns that
in the male may curve in a spiral
more than 39 in. (1 m) long. Their
fur is usually brown with a whitish
rump patch. The related thinhorn, or
Dall’s sheep (O. dalli), of Alaska and
Canada is similar to the bighorn.
Both species are about 39 in. (1 m)
tall at the shoulder, but the bighorn
is heavier, weighing up to 300 lb
(136 kg). They live in small groups
among remote crags and cliffs of
mountainous areas and feed mainly
on grasses. Bighorn rams compete
for females by launching themselves
at each other from a few yards’ dis-
tance and clashing horns.
Bighorn Mountains Mountain range, southern Montana and northern
Wyoming, U.S. It is a range of the northern ROCKY MOUNTAINS extending
120 mi (193 km), rising abruptly 4,000–5,000 ft (1,200–1,500 m) above
Billiton
Binet
but he was largely self-taught. He entered politics in Missouri and worked
as an itinerant portrait painter before turning to the lively routines of fron-
tier life for inspiration. Bingham is known for his incisive characteriza-
tions, clear, golden light, and talent
for organizing large, dense
compositions. His best-known works include Fur Traders Descending the
Missouri (1845) and Jolly Flatboatmen (1846).
bingo Game of chance played with cards having a grid of numbered
squares corresponding to numbered balls drawn at random. When a num-
ber on the card is drawn, the players cover that number (should they have
it); the game is won by covering a certain number of squares in a row (ver-
tically, horizontally, or diagonally). Cards are purchased and proceeds are
placed into a common “pot”; winning cards are awarded a portion of the
pot. Wildly popular in the mid 20th century, bingo has in recent decades
suffered a decline in America but has increased in popularity in other parts
of the world. The earliest name for bingo—lotto—was recorded in Britain
in 1776; the game is sometimes called keno in the U.S.
Binh Dinh Vuong See LE LOI
Bío-Bío
biological warfare or germ warfare Military use of disease-
TAXONOMY, EMBR YOLOGY, GENETICS, and ECOLOGY, each of which can be further
ZOOLOGY (animals), ORNITHOLOGY (birds), ENTOMOLOGY (insects), MYCOLOGY
(fungi), MICROBIOLOGY (microorganisms), and BACTERIOLOGY (bacteria). See
also BIOCHEMISTR Y; MOLECULAR BIOLOGY.
category. See also CREATIONISM; SOCIOBIOLOGY.
bioluminescence
Bioy Casares
Biringuccio
Bischof
Annexed by Germany in 1884, it was named for OTTO VON BISMARCK. Occu-
pied by Australia in 1914, it was made a mandated territory of Australia
in 1920. The group became part of the UN Trust Territory of New Guinea
after World War II and part of Papua New Guinea when it attained inde-
pendence in 1975.
bismuth
and by two sheets of tissue called the mantle. Bivalves have no head. They
feed on PHYTOPLANKTON by pumping water across the gills and trapping food
particles that are then moved to the mouth. Bivalves are found in most
parts of the ocean from the intertidal zone to abyssal depths.
revealing the red ground. The great
Attic painters (mid 6th century BC),
most notably EXEKIAS, developed nar-
rative scene decoration and perfected
the style. It continued to be popular
until the advent of RED-FIGURE POTTER Y
(c. 530 BC).
Black Forest German Schwarz-
228 I Black Muslims (cid:2) blackbird
Black Muslims See Nation of ISLAM
black nationalism U.S. political and social movement aimed at
developing economic power and community and ethnic pride among Afri-
can Americans. It was proclaimed by MARCUS GARVEY in the early 20th
century, when many U.S. black nationalists hoped for the eventual cre-
ation of a separate black nation in Africa. In the 1960s and ’70s, ELIJAH
MUHAMMAD and MALCOLM X preached the ideal of black nationalism as an
alternative to assimilation into the predominantly white culture of the U.S.
Black Panther Party (for Self-Defense) U.S. African American
PEPPER.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Blackberry (Rubus).
DEREK FELL
TRUM. See also ABSORPTION.
blackcap Common WARBLER (Sylvia atricapilla, family Sylviidae) from
Europe and North Africa to central
Asia. It is about 6 in. (14 cm) long
and has brownish upper parts, gray
underparts and face, and a black
(male) or reddish brown (female)
crown. Common in woodland bor-
ders and rough hedges, it has a rich
song.
Blackett
Blackwell’s Island See ROOSEVELT ISLAND
Blair, Tony orig. Anthony Charles Lynton (b. May 6, 1953, Edin-
burgh, Scot.) British politician who in 1997 became the country’s young-
est prime minister since 1812. Blair was a lawyer before winning election
to the House of COMMONS in 1983. Entering the shadow cabinet of the
LABOUR PARTY in 1988 at age 35, Blair urged the party to move to the politi-
cal centre and deemphasize its traditional advocacy of state control and
public ownership of certain sectors of the economy. He assumed leader-
ship of Labour in 1994 and revamped its platform. He led the party to
victories in the 1997, 2001, and 2005 elections. His government brokered
a peace agreement between unionists and republicans in Northern Ireland,
introduced devolved assemblies in Wales and Scotland, and carried out
reforms of Parliament. After the SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACKS on the U.S. in 2001,
Blair allied the United Kingdom with the U.S. and its president, GEORGE
W. BUSH, in a global war against terrorism. In late 2002 Blair and Bush
accused the Iraqi government of ÍADD0M hUSSEIN of continuing to possess
and develop biological, chemical, and nuclear weapons in violation of UN
mandates. Despite deep divisions within his own party and strong public
opposition to a war with Iraq, Blair, with Bush, led an attack on Iraq that
toppled hussein’s regime in March–April 2003.
Blais
Blakey, Art later Abdullah Ibn Buhaina (b. Oct. 11, 1919, Pitts-
Blalock
Blaue Reiter
blitzkrieg
MACULAR DEGENERATION; VISUAL-FIELD DEFECT.
Bliss, Sir Arthur (Edward Drummond) (b. Aug. 2, 1891, Lon-
Bliss, William D(wight) P(orter) (b. Aug. 20, 1856, Constantino-
supported the RUHR OCCUPATION (1923) to force Germany to pay reparations.
It gradually lost public support, and it was defeated in the 1924 elections.
Bloch
Blount
mals and trail persons. A large, strong dog, the bloodhound stands 23–27
in. (58–69 cm) and weighs 80–110 lb (35–50 kg). It has short hair and
long ears, with loose skin that falls into folds and wrinkles around the
head and neck. The coat is black-and-tan, red-brown and tan, or tawny.
Bloodless Revolution See GLORIOUS REVOLUTION
Bloomer, Amelia orig. Amelia Jenks (b. May 27, 1818, Homer,
blue-green algae See CYANOBAC-
TERIA
blue ground See KIMBERLITE
blue law U.S. statute regulating
work, commerce, and amusements on Sundays. The name is said to derive
from a list of Sabbath regulations published (on blue paper or in blue
wrappers) in New Haven, Conn., in 1781. Throughout colonial New
England such laws regulated morals and conduct. Most lapsed after the
American Revolution, but some, such as prohibitions against the Sunday
sale of alcoholic beverages, remain on the books in some areas.
Blue Mountains Plateau region, part of the GREAT DIVIDING RANGE,
southeastern AUSTRALIA. Located in NEW SOUTH WALES, the region rises to
about 3,600 ft (1,100 m). Once used as a retreat by wealthy SYDNEY resi-
dents, it is now accessible by good roads and is a popular tourist area; the
Blue Mountains area was designated a UNESCO WORLD HERITAGE SITE in
2000. The city of Blue Mountains (pop., 2004 est.: 77,011) was incorpo-
rated in 1947.
Blue Mountains Mountain range, eastern Jamaica. It extends from
north of KINGSTON eastward 30 mi (50 km) to the Caribbean Sea. Its high-
est point is Blue Mountain Peak, at 7,388 ft (2,252 m). It experiences
heavy rain and widely divergent temperatures. Blue Mountain coffee is
famous for its excellent quality.
Blue Nile See NILE RIVER
Blue Ridge or Blue Ridge Mountains Section of the APPALACHIAN
MOUNTAINS, eastern U.S. The range extends southward from Carlisle, Pa.,
through parts of Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina
to Mt. Oglethorpe in Georgia. The highest peaks are in the Black Moun-
tains of North Carolina; the average elevation is 2,000–4,000 ft (600–
1,200 m). The scenic Blue Ridge Parkway, established in 1936 and
administered by the National Park Service, runs 469 mi (755 km) along
the crest.
blue whale Mottled, blue-gray BALEEN WHALE (Balaenoptera musculus),
also called sulfur-bottom whale because of the yellowish DIATOMS on some
individuals. The largest of all animals, the blue whale reaches a maxi-
mum length of about 100 ft (30 m) and a maximum weight of 150 tons
(136,000 kg). It is found alone or in small groups in all oceans. In sum-
mer it feeds on KRILL in polar waters, and in winter it moves toward the
equator to breed. It was once the most important of the commercially
hunted baleen whales, and its populations were greatly reduced. Listed as
an ENDANGERED SPECIES, it is now protected.
Bluebeard or Gilles de Rais
wearing at the time. The word bluestocking came to be applied derisively
to a woman who affects literary or learned interests.
Bluford
the foundation for JAZZ, RHYTHM AND BLUES, and ROCK MUSIC.
often criticized for their stereotyped characters, simple writing style, and
didactic moralism, her books were widely translated and remained inter-
nationally popular long after her death.
BMW in full Bayerische Motoren Werke
Boccaccio
India). The tree growing on the site now is believed to be a descendant
of the original, planted from a cutting of a tree in Sri Lanka that had been
propagated from the original; both trees are sites of pilgrimage for Bud-
dhists. The bo tree or a representation of its leaf has often been used as
a symbol of the Buddha.
Bodhidharma
Bogarde
German GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE of the
15th century.
Bohemond
Boito
America’s poorest countries, Bolivia was
plagued by governmental instability for
much of the 20th century. Social and eco-
nomic tension continued in the early 21st
century, fueled by resistance to govern-
ment efforts to eradicate the growth of coca (from which the narcotic
cocaine is derived), by unrest among Bolivia’s Indians, and by disagree-
ments over how to exploit the country’s vast natural gas reserves.
dancers, including YEKATERINA GELTZER, VASILY TIKHOMIROV, GALINA ULANOVA,
Boltzmann
Bonaparte,
relations between the brothers. However, he offered Napoleon help dur-
ing the HUNDRED DAYS and was the last to defend Napoleon’s prerogatives
at the time of his second abdication, after which he lived in Italy.
(Marie-) Pauline (b. Oct. 20, 1780, Ajaccio,
Corsica—d. June 9, 1825, Florence) French noblewoman. A sister of
NAPOLEON, in 1797 she married one of his staff officers, Gen. C.V.E.
Leclerc (1772–1802). After Leclerc’s death, she married Prince Camillo
F.L. Borghese (1803) and went with him to Rome. She soon tired of him
and returned to Paris, where her behaviour caused some scandal. In 1806
she received the title of duchess of Guastalla. She died of cancer in Flo-
rence.
Bonaventure
CALCIUM DEFICIENCY). The process also causes underutilized bone, as in an
immobilized limb, to atrophy. Bone disorders include RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS,
OSTEOARTHRITIS, RICKETS, OSTEOPOROSIS, and TUMOURs. Bone can fracture sud-
denly or over time, as in stress fractures.
Bône See ANNABA
bone china Hard-paste PORCELAIN containing bone ash. It was developed
by Josiah Spode (1754–1827)
England c. 1800. The addition of
bone ash to china stone and china
clay (i.e., hard china) made bone
china easier to manufacture;
stronger, does not chip easily, and
has an ivory-white colour that lends
itself to decoration. Other factories
(Minton, Derby, Worcester, WEDG-
WOOD, Rockingham) adopted the for-
mula in the early 19th century. Bone
china remains popular for tableware
in Britain and the U.S. See also
STONEWARE.
bone marrow or myeloid tis-
Bonheur
Bonnard
LINDISFARNE GOSPELS.
Booker Prize in full (2002– ) Man Booker Prize Prestigious Brit-
ish award given annually to a full-length novel. It was established in 1968
by the multinational company Booker McConnell as a counterpart to the
French Prix Goncourt. The Booker Prize Foundation administers the prize,
aided by an advisory committee. Entries, which are nominated by publish-
ers, must be written by an English-language author from the United King-
dom, the Commonwealth countries, Ireland, or South Africa. Its winners
have included KINGSLEY AMIS, A.S. BYATT, RUTH PRAWER JHABVALA, and SALMAN
RUSHDIE. In 1992 a Booker Russian Novel Prize was introduced.
book (cid:2) Boolean algebra
Jane Patterson’s bookplate designed by
Robert Anning Bell, English, 1890s
COURTESY OF THE VICTORIA AND ALBERT MUSEUM,
LONDON
Boolean algebra Symbolic sys-
tem used for designing logic circuits
and networks for DIGITAL COMPUTERS. Its
chief utility is in representing the
truth value of statements, rather than
the numeric quantities handled by
ordinary algebra. It lends itself to use
in the binary system employed by
digital computers, since the only pos-
sible truth values, true and false, can
be represented by the binary digits 1
and 0. A circuit in computer memory
can be open or closed, depending on
the value assigned to it, and it is the
integrated work of such circuits that
George Boole, engraving.
COURTESY OF THE TRUSTEES OF THE BRITISH MUSEUM;
PHOTOGRAPH, J.R. FREEMAN & CO. LTD.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Boone, Daniel
Bophuthatswana
Booth, Edwin (Thomas)
WILKES BOOTH
HELIOTROPES, and lungworts (Pulmo-
naria). Borage is also used as an
herbal and bee plant and eaten as a
vegetable.
Borah, William E(dgar)
borax or tincal
Beings (1967) almost erase the distinctions between prose and poetry.
Though he later repudiated it, he is credited with establishing in South
America the modernist Ultraist movement, a rebellion against the deca-
dence of the established writers of the Generation of ’98.
Borghese family
Borobudur
Bosanquet
boson
botanical garden or botanic garden Originally, a collection of
living plants designed to illustrate relationships within plant groups. Most
modern botanical gardens are concerned primarily with exhibiting orna-
mental plants in a scheme that emphasizes natural relationships. A display
garden of mostly woody plants (shrubs and trees) is often called an ARBO-
RETUM. The botanical garden as an institution can be traced to ancient China
and many Mediterranean countries, where such gardens were often cen-
ters for raising plants used for food and medicines. Botanical gardens are
also reservoirs of valuable heritable characteristics, potentially important
in the breeding of new varieties of plants. Still another function is the
training of gardeners. The world’s most famous botanical garden is KEW
GARDENS.
fossil POLLEN and SPORES). See also FORESTR Y, HORTICULTURE.
Botha
the South African boundary in the southeast. The economy traditionally
depends on livestock raising; the development of diamond mining has
increased the country’s wealth. Botswana is a republic with one legisla-
tive body; its head of state and government is the president. The region’s
earliest inhabitants were the Khoekhoe and San. Sites were settled as early
as AD 190 during the southerly migration of Bantu-speaking farmers.
Tswana dynasties, which developed in the western TRANSVAAL in the 13th–
14th centuries, moved into Botswana in the 18th century and established
several powerful states. European missionaries arrived in the early 19th
century, but it was the discovery of gold in 1867 that excited European
interest. In 1885 the area became the British Bechuanaland Protectorate,
remaining so until the 1960s. In 1966 the Republic of Bechuanaland was
proclaimed as an independent member of the British COMMONWEALTH, and
later that year its name was changed to Botswana. Independent Botswana
tried to maintain a delicate balance between its economic dependence on
South Africa and its relations with the surrounding black countries; the
independence of Namibia in 1990 and South Africa’s rejection of apart-
heid eased tensions.
Botticelli
Camulodunum (Colchester), Verulamium (St. Albans), and part of Lond-
inium (London) and military posts; according to TACITUS, her forces massa-
cred up to 70,000 Romans and pro-Roman Britons and destroyed the
Roman 9th Legion. She is thought to have taken poison or died of shock
when the Roman governor rallied his troops and destroyed her huge army.
Boudin
boulevards originally followed the city walls (the word originally meant
“bulwark”) and were built in the ancient Middle East, especially at Anti-
och. In Paris, straight and geometrically precise boulevards were incor-
porated into design principles taught at the École des BEAUX-ARTS, and they
form a prominent feature of the city. Similar boulevards are found in other
cities such as Washington, D.C. Formal curving boulevards are a feature
of such cities as Vienna and Prague.
Boulez
Bourgeois
Bow porcelain
bowls or lawn bowls or lawn bowling Bowling game similar to
the Italian BOCCIE and the French BOULES played on a green with wooden
balls (called bowls) that are rolled at a target ball (the jack). The object
is to roll one’s bowls so that they come to rest nearer to the jack than
those of an opponent, sometimes achieved by knocking aside an oppo-
nent’s bowl or jack. One point is awarded for each winning bowl. Depend-
ing on the game, players use four, three, or two bowls, and games end at
18 or 21 points.
Bowman
Boyer
Bradley, Bill in full William Warren Bradley (b. July 28, 1943,
the SEMINOLE WARS and the MEXICAN
the BATTLE OF
WAR. When North Carolina seceded,
he joined the Confederate army and
fought in the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR. He
was promoted to general in 1862 at
the BATTLE OF SHILOH. As commander
of the Army of Tennessee, he led his
troops to victory at
CHICKAMAUGA. His forces besieged
the Union troops at Chattanooga but
were eventually routed. He was
relieved
command
appointed military adviser to Con-
federate Pres. JEFFERSON DAVIS.
Bragg law Relation between the
spacing of atomic planes in crystals
and the angles of incidence at which
the planes produce the most intense
LIAM BRAGG.
Brahe
brahma-loka
also exist for other languages, for mathematical and technical material,
and for musical notation. Braille may be handwritten—from right to left—
using a stylus to press dots into a piece of paper between hinged metal
plates; when the sheet is turned over, the dots face up and are read from
left to right. Braille typewriters and electric embossing machines are also
used.
Braille
friction and circulation of the liquid (usually water) from a series of pock-
ets in the rotor to a series of complementary pockets in the stator. See also
AIR BRAKE.
Bramante
Indians
in Connecticut. He
fought for the British in the last
FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR (1754–63).
He led four of
the six IROQUOIS
nations on the British side in the
AMERICAN REVOLUTION, winning several
notable battles. After the war Brant
was granted land along the Grand
River in Ontario, Can., where he
ruled peacefully and continued his
missionary work.
Brant, Sebastian (b. 1458?,
Strassburg—d. May
1521,
Strassburg) German poet. He taught
law and later was appointed imperial
councillor and court palatine by
MAXIMILIAN I. His varied writings
include works on law, religion, poli-
tics, and especially morals. His best-
known work is The Ship of Fools
(1494), an allegory telling of fools
on a ship bound for a “fool’s para-
dise.” The most famous German literary work of the 15th century, it ridi-
cules the vices of the age and gave rise to a whole school of fool’s
literature.
Braque
Brandt, Bill orig. Hermann Wilhelm Brandt (b. May 1904, Ham-
Brandt, Willy orig. Herbert Ernst Karl Frahm (b. Dec. 18, 1913,
ECONOMIC COMMUNITY. For
naval and admiralty brasses, in which a small amount of tin improves
resistance to corrosion by seawater; and aluminum brasses, which pro-
vide strength and corrosion resistance where the naval brasses may fail.
brass instrument Musical wind instrument, usually made of brass or
other metal, in which the vibration of the player’s lips against a cup- or
funnel-shaped mouthpiece causes the initial vibration of an air column.
The TRUMPET, TROMBONE, FRENCH HORN, TUBA, EUPHONIUM, SOUSAPHONE, CORNET,
FLÜGELHORN, and BUGLE, as well as historical instruments such as the ophi-
cleide, cornett, and serpent, are considered brass instruments (though the
last two were made of wood); the saxophones, though made of brass, are
Brassaï
Brazos
Brébeuf
Bremen
dialects; this disunity has hindered efforts to form orthographic and lit-
erary standards. Though Breton may have half a million speakers, use of
the language is generally thought to be in sharp decline among younger
people despite a resurgence of regional particularism in western Europe.
BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT (WORLD BANK) and the INTERNA-
TIONAL MONETAR Y FUND. See also JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES.
bretwalda
274 I bridewealth (cid:2) Bridget
bridewealth Payment made by the groom or his kin to the kin of the
wife in order to ratify the marriage. The practice is common in most parts
of the globe in one form or another, but it is perhaps most prevalent in
Africa. It is most often a matter of social and symbolic as well as eco-
nomic reciprocity, being part of a long series of exchanges between the
two intermarrying families. It represents a pledge that the wife will be
well treated and serves as compensation for her family’s loss. Payment
may consist of goods or, less frequently, services, and it may be paid in
one sum or regularly over a long period of time. See also DOWR Y.
bridge Structure that spans horizontally to allow pedestrians and
vehicles to cross a void. Bridge construction has always presented civil
engineering with its greatest challenges. The simplest bridge is the beam
(or girder) bridge, consisting of straight, rigid beams of steel or concrete
placed across a span. Ancient Roman bridges are famous for their rounded
arch form, which permitted spans much longer than those of stone beams
and were more durable than wood. A modern version of the arch bridge
might have a trussed arch anchored to the abutments and a deck hanging
from the arch by vertical cables. Suspension bridges (e.g., BROOKLYN BRIDGE,
GOLDEN GATE BRIDGE) are capable of spanning great distances; their main
support members are cables composed of thousands of strands of wire
supported by two towers and anchored at each end, and the deck is sus-
pended by vertical cables hung from the main cables. In cable-stayed
bridges, cables fan out and down from a central tower to various points
on the deck; variations of this design have resulted in bridges of striking
design and very long span. Other bridges include the truss bridge, popu-
lar (e.g., for railroad bridges) because it uses a relatively small amount
of material to carry large loads, and the cantilever bridge, typically made
with three spans, with the outer spans anchored down at the shore and the
central span resting on the cantilevered arms.
Bridges, Harry orig. Alfred Bryant Renton (b. July 28, 1901,
Bridges, Robert
(Seymour)
(b. Oct. 23, 1844, Walmer, Kent,
Eng.—d. April 21, 1930, Boar’s Hill,
Oxford) English poet. He published
several long poems and poetic dra-
mas, but his reputation rests on the
lyrics collected in Shorter Poems
(1890, 1894), which reveal his mas-
tery of prosody. His 1916 edition of
the poetry of his friend GERARD MAN-
LEY HOPKINS rescued it from obscurity.
He was poet
laureate of England
from 1913 until his death.
c. 1303,
Swed.—d. July 23, 1373, Rome;
canonized Oct. 8, 1391; feast day
July 23) Mystic and patron saint of
Sweden. She had religious visions
from an early age but married and
had eight children,
including St.
Catherine of Sweden. On the death
of her husband (1344), she retired to
Bridget, Saint
Robert Bridges, gold-point drawing by
W. Strang; in the National Portrait
Gallery, London
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY,
LONDON
Three common types of bridge design.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
brigade
276 I Bristol (cid:2) British Library
British Airways in full British Airways PLC International passen-
ger airline based in London. In 1936 British Airways Ltd. was founded
through the merger of three smaller airlines. A merger with Imperial Air-
ways in 1939 created British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC). The
British Airways name returned in 1974 with the government-mandated
merger of BOAC and British European Airways (BEA). The airline was
privatized in 1987. It merged with British Caledonian later that year. Brit-
ish Airways is one of Europe’s largest air carriers.
British American Tobacco PLC formerly British-American
Tobacco Company Ltd. (1902–76) and B.A.T Industries PLC
(1976–98) British conglomerate that is one of the world’s largest manu-
facturers of tobacco products. The company’s international headquarters
are in London, while its chief American subsidiary, Brown & Williamson
Tobacco Corporation, is headquartered in Louisville, Ky. Its acquisitions
have included the American Tobacco Company (1994), which represents
such cigarette brands as Pall Mall and Lucky Strike; Rothmans Interna-
tional (1999), known for its Dunhill and Rothmans brands; and Canada’s
largest cigarette company, Imperial Tobacco (2000).
British Broadcasting Corp. See BBC
province (founded 1908). It comprises faculties of agricultural sciences,
applied science, arts, commerce and business administration, dentistry,
education, forestry, graduate studies, law, medicine, pharmacy, theology,
and science. Plant research is conducted at the UBC Botanical Garden,
which is open to the public. The university has extensive study-abroad
and continuing-education programs.
British Commonwealth See COMMONWEALTH
British Expeditionary Force (BEF) Home-based regular British
army forces sent to northern France at the start of World Wars I and II to
support the French armies. Britain wished to help France in case of a Ger-
man attack, and the BEF was created in 1908 to ensure that British forces
would be trained and ready to respond quickly. It consisted of six INFAN-
TR Y divisions and one CAVALR Y division. Five divisions sent to France at the
outbreak of World War I sustained heavy losses and were succeeded by
vast British armies. Divisions sent to France early in World War II (1939)
returned to England when France fell the next year.
British Guiana See GUYANA
British Honduras See BELIZE
British Invasion Musical movement. In the mid 1960s the popularity
of a number of British rock-and-roll (“beat”) groups spread rapidly to the
U.S., beginning with the triumphant arrival of Liverpool’s BEATLES in New
York in 1964 and continuing with the ROLLING STONES, the Animals, and
others. Building on 1950s U.S. models, these groups incorporated such
local musical traditions as skiffle (acoustic drummerless ensembles),
dancehall, and Celtic folk.
British Library National library of Great Britain, formed by the Brit-
ish Library Act (1972) and organized July 1, 1973. It consists of the former
BRITISH MUSEUM library, the National Central Library, the National Lending
Library for Science and Technology, and the British National Bibliogra-
phy. The British Museum library, founded in 1753 based on earlier col-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
British Virgin Islands See British VIRGIN ISLANDS
Brittany French Bretagne
SATIN or TWILL weave (see WEAVING).
The background may be twill, satin,
or plain weave. The rich,
fairly
heavy fabric is frequently used for
evening
dresses,
draperies,
upholstery.
broccoli Plant (Brassica oleracea,
Botrytis group) closely related to
CABBAGE in the MUSTARD FAMILY. A fast-
Broch
Bronzino
Brontosaurus See APATOSAURUS
Bronx Zoo formally New York Zoological Park ZOO in New
Brooks, Romaine Goddard orig. Beatrice Romaine God-
Brouwer
Brooks Islands See MIDWAY
Brooks Range Mountain range, northern Alaska, U.S. It extends about
600 mi (1,000 km) from Kotzebue Sound to the Canadian border. Its
highest peak is Mount Isto, at 9,060 ft (2,760 m). Forming the northwest-
ern end of the ROCKY MOUNTAINS, it lies within GATES OF THE ARCTIC NATIONAL
PARK. Huge reserves of oil were discovered at PRUDHOE BAY, and the range
is crossed at Atigun Pass by the TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE.
Brooks, Gwendolyn (Elizabeth) (b. June 7, 1917, Topeka, Kan.,
World War I. In 1921 he joined the U.S. Communist Party; he served as
the party’s general secretary from 1930 to 1944 and was its presidential
candidate in 1936 and 1940. In 1944 he was removed from his position
for declaring that capitalism and socialism could coexist, and in 1946 he
was expelled from the party.
Brown, Capability orig. Lancelot Brown (b. 1715, Kirkharle,
Brown, Jim orig. James Nathaniel Brown (b. Feb. 17, 1936, St.
Simons, Ga., U.S.) U.S. football player, often considered the greatest run-
ning back of all time. He was an All-American in football and lacrosse
at Syracuse University. In his nine seasons with the Cleveland Browns
(1957–65), he set NFL overall rushing and combined yardage records that
Brown, C. (cid:2) Brown, W.
the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
282 I brown bear (cid:2) browser
TREAT DAVIDSON—THE NATIONAL AUDUBON SOCIETY
COLLECTION/PHOTO RESEARCHERS
Brown trout (Salmo trutta)
Brown v. Board of Education (of Topeka) (1954) U.S. Supreme
Court case in which the court ruled unanimously that RACIAL SEGREGATION
in public schools violated the 14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
The amendment says that no state may deny equal protection of the laws
to any person within its jurisdiction. The court declared separate educa-
tional facilities to be inherently unequal, thus reversing its 1896 ruling in
PLESSY V. FERGUSON. The Brown ruling was limited to public schools, but it
was believed to imply that segregation is not permissible in other public
facilities. Guidelines for ending segregation were presented and school
boards were advised to proceed “with all deliberate speed.” See also THUR-
GOOD MARSHALL.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Browning, Robert (b. May 7,
Elizabeth Barrett Browning, detail of an
oil painting by Michele Gordigiani,
1858; in the National Portrait Gallery,
London.
Browning, Elizabeth Barrett orig. Elizabeth Barrett (b. March
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY,
LONDON
Browning, Tod orig. Charles Albert Browning (b. July 12, 1880,
Brownshirts See SA
standard style rules. Netscape Navigator became the dominant Web
browser soon after its release in 1994; Microsoft’s Internet Explorer was
introduced a year later and has become widespread.
Brubeck, Dave orig. David Warren Brubeck (b. Dec. 6, 1920,
Bruce, Lenny orig. Leonard Alfred Schneider (b. Oct. 13, 1925,
Mineola, N.Y., U.S.—d. Aug. 3, 1966, Hollywood, Calif.) U.S. stand-up
comedian. He studied acting and began performing stand-up routines in
nightclubs in the 1950s, soon developing a style marked by black humour
and punctuated with obscenity. As he gained notoriety, he focused his
material on criticisms of the social and legal establishments, organized
religion, and other controversial subjects. His reputation acquired iconic
status as a daring performer and an activist for free speech after his death
from a drug overdose.
brucellosis
dancer. From 1937 he studied at the
Royal Danish Ballet training school,
and in 1947 he joined the company.
He performed as guest soloist with
many other companies,
including
American Ballet Theatre in the
1950s and ’60s, dancing leading
roles in such ballets as La Sylphide,
Swan Lake, and Carmen. He was
admired for his classical technique.
He later served as director of the
Royal Swedish Opera House (1967–
72) and assistant director (1973–81)
and director (1983–86) of Canada’s
National Ballet.
bruise or contusion Visible blu-
ish or purplish mark beneath the sur-
face of unbroken skin,
indicating
burst blood vessels in deeper tissue
layers. Bruises are usually caused by
a blow or pressure, but they may occur spontaneously in elderly persons.
The yellowish hue that becomes visible as a bruise heals comes from the
disintegration and gradual absorption of blood.
Brumaire
Brunelleschi
world law by espousing arbitration to prevent war. A believer in a literal
interpretation of the Bible, he was a prosecuting attorney in the SCOPES TRIAL
(1925), in which he debated CLARENCE DARROW on the issue of evolution;
the trial took a heavy toll on his health, and he died soon after it ended.
Bryant, Bear orig. Paul William Bryant (b. Sept. 11, 1913,
WALDO EMERSON and HENR Y DAVID THO-
REAU. Admitted to the bar at age 21,
he spent nearly 10 years as an attor-
ney, a profession he hated. His
Poems
(1821),
including “To a
Waterfowl,” secured his reputation.
In 1825 he moved to New York City,
where for almost 50 years (1829–78)
he was editor in chief of the Evening
Post, which he transformed into an
organ of progressive thought.
Bryce Canyon National Park
Park, southern Utah, U.S. It is not a
true canyon but rather a series of
natural amphitheatres below which
stands an array of limestone and
sandstone columns. Its geology is related to that of GRAND CANYON and
ZION national parks, since the stone of all three was formed while the entire
region was under a shallow sea. The park, established in 1928, covers
35,835 acres (14,513 hectares).
Bryn Mawr
gian rebellion in 1830 and then the capital of Belgium. An important
industrial and commercial city, it is the headquarters of both NATO and
the EUROPEAN UNION.
Brutus, Marcus Junius or Quintus Caepio Brutus (b. 85—d.
Bruyère, Jean de La See Jean
de LA BRUYERE
Bryan, William Jennings (b.
March
1860,
Salem,
Ill.,
U.S.—d. July 26, 1925, Dayton,
Tenn.) U.S. politician and orator. He
practiced law at Jacksonville, Ill.
(1883–87), before moving to Lin-
coln, Neb., where he was elected to
the U.S. Congress in 1890. In the
U.S. House
of Representatives
(1891–95), he became the national
leader of the FREE SILVER MOVEMENT; he
advocated its aims in his “Cross of
Gold” speech, which won him the
DEMOCRATIC PARTY nomination for
president in 1896. He was the party’s
nominee again in 1900 and 1908. In
1901 he founded a newspaper, The
Commoner, and thereafter lectured
widely to admiring audiences; he
was called “the Great Commoner.”
He helped secure the presidential
nomination for WOODROW WILSON in
1912 and served as his secretary of
state
(1913–15),
contributing to
and gelatinous to hard with calcium-containing skeletons. Freshwater bry-
ozoans attach primarily to leaves, stems, and tree roots in shallow water.
Marine bryozoans have a wide range of habitats, from coastal areas to
great ocean depths, but are most common just below the tidemarks. Bry-
ozoans feed by capturing plankton with their tentacles.
brytenwalda See BRETWALDA
BSE See MAD COW DISEASE
Buber
Buchwald
buddleia
of MASS ACTION.
Buffon
electrical wiring, HVAC (HEATING, VENTILATING, and AIR-CONDITIONING), WIN-
DOWS, FLOOR COVERINGS, plasterwork, MOLDINGS, ceramic TILE, cabinets, and
other features. See also ARCHITECTURE.
building stone See building STONE
Bujumbura
counterthrust in the wooded Ardennes region of southern Belgium. The
German drive, led by GERD VON RUNDSTEDT’s PANZER army, was initially suc-
cessful but was halted by Allied resistance and reinforcements led by
GEORGE PATTON. The Germans withdrew in January 1945, but both sides
suffered heavy losses.
Buli style
bulletin-board system (BBS) Computerized system used to
Bülow
MOROCCAN CRISES.
Bülow
Bunin
Burbidge, (Eleanor) Marga-
ret orig. Eleanor Margaret
SYNTHESIS).
burbot
Wind (1910), introduced the animal characters that were to populate his
subsequent stories, which were published in many languages. He pro-
moted conservationism through his “Wildlife Protection Program,” his
“Radio Nature League,” and other organizations. He wrote more than 170
books and 15,000 stories for newspaper columns.
Burgess
Burne-Jones
LESQUE SHOW).
burlesque show Stage entertainment composed of slapstick sketches,
bawdy humour, chorus numbers, and solo dances. Introduced in the U.S.
in 1868 by a company of English chorus girls, it developed as a version
of the MINSTREL SHOW, divided into three parts: (1) a series of coarse humor-
ous songs, slapstick sketches, and comic monologues; (2) the olio, or
mixture of variety acts (e.g., acrobats, magicians, singers); and (3) cho-
rus numbers and occasionally a takeoff, or burlesque, on politics or a cur-
rent play. The show ended with an exotic dancer or a boxing match. In
the early 20th century, many performers, including FANNY BRICE, AL JOL-
SON, and W.C. FIELDS, began their careers in burlesque. The addition of the
striptease in the 1920s made a star of GYPSY ROSE LEE, but censorship and
competition from motion pictures soon led to burlesque’s decline.
Burlingame, Anson (b. Nov. 14, 1820, New Berlin, N.Y., U.S.—d.
Feb. 23, 1870, St. Petersburg, Russia) U.S. diplomat. He served in the
U.S. House of Representatives (1855–61) and helped found the REPUBLICAN
PARTY. As U.S. minister to China (1861–67), he implemented a policy of
cooperation between China and the Western powers. He so impressed the
Burnet
Burschenschaft
bus (cid:2) Bush
George W. Bush.
the ELECTORAL COLLEGE (271–266). In
ERIC DRAPER/WHITE HOUSE PHOTO
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
bushid§
ogy, presented a refutation of hedonism and of the notion that self-interest
is the ultimate principle of good conduct.
Butler, Nicholas M(urray) (b. April 2, 1862, Elizabeth, N.J.,
U.S.—d. Dec. 7, 1947, New York, N.Y.) U.S. educator. He received his
Ph.D. from Columbia University. He was the founding president of what
is today Columbia’s Teachers College (1886–91). As president of Colum-
bia University itself (1901–45), he led the institution to world renown.
Early in his career he criticized prevailing pedagogical methods, but later
he turned on pedagogical reform itself, decrying vocationalism in educa-
tion and behaviorism in psychology. A champion of international under-
standing, he helped establish the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace in 1910 and served as its president (1925–45). In 1931 he shared
the Nobel Peace Prize with JANE ADDAMS.
Butler, R(ichard) A(usten), baron of Saffron Walden (b. Dec.
buttress Exterior support, usually of masonry, projecting from the face
of a wall and serving to strengthen it or resist outward thrust from an arch
or roof. Buttresses also have a decorative function. Though used since
ancient times (Mesopotamian temples featured decorative buttresses, as
did Roman and Byzantine structures), they are especially associated with
GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE. See also FLYING BUTTRESS.
Butung See BUTON
Buwayhid dynasty See BãYID DYNASTY
Buxtehude
byssinosis
C High-level procedural computer PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE with many low-
level features, including the ability to handle memory addresses and bits.
It is highly portable among platforms and therefore widely used in indus-
try and among computer professionals. C was developed by Dennis M.
Ritchie (born 1941) of Bell Laboratories in 1972. The OPERATING SYSTEM
UNIX was written almost exclusively in C, and C has been standardized
as part of POSIX (Portable Operating System Interface for UNIX).
VISION.
Cabral
Cacus and Caca
tury. The English took it in 1346 and 1417 and held it until 1450. It suf-
fered in the Wars of RELIGION and fell to the Protestants in 1562. During
the FRENCH REVOLUTION it was a centre for the GIRONDIN movement. The city
was severely damaged in the Allied NORMANDY CAMPAIGN (1944), but it
was rebuilt. Notable structures include the 11th-century abbey and the
university. Caen is a transportation centre and manufactures automobiles
and electrical equipment.
Caere
Caillaux
only some 85,000 people reported themselves to be Acadian/Cajun, the
census form also included a French Canadian category, which may have
confused the issue. Experts suggest that there are some 100,000 Cajuns
in Texas and from 500,000 to 700,000 Cajuns in Louisiana. In recent
decades Cajun cuisine, noted for its use of spicy seasonings, and ZYDECO
music have become popular among non-Cajuns.
cakravartin See CHAKRAVARTIN
Calabar
DEVICES ushered in calculators that could perform mathematical functions
in addition to basic arithmetic, and also store data and instructions in
memory registers, providing programming capabilities similar to those of
small computers.
calculus Field of mathematics that analyzes aspects of change in pro-
cesses or systems that can be modeled by FUNCTIONs. Through its two pri-
mary tools—the DERIVATIVE and the INTEGRAL—it allows precise calculation
of rates of change and of the total amount of change in such a system.
The derivative and the integral grew out of the idea of a LIMIT, the logical
extension of the concept of a function over smaller and smaller intervals.
The relationship between DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS and INTEGRAL CALCULUS, known
Calcutta See KOLKATA
Caldecott
calendula
Californian Indian Any member
INDIAN; POMO; YUMAn.
Caligula
Callas
calumet
Cambodian See KHMER
Cambodian language See KHMER LANGUAGE
Cambon
Cambridge Agreement Pledge made in Cambridge, England, in
1629 by Puritan stockholders of the Massachusetts Bay Co. to emigrate
to New England if the colony’s government could be transferred there.
The company agreed and shifted control of the corporation to the signers
of the agreement. JOHN WINTHROP was elected governor, and he set sail in
1630 with a large group of Puritan followers to settle in the Boston area
(see MASSACHUSETTS BAY COLONY).
Cambridge Platonists
of mountains that form a natural boundary between Cameroon and Nige-
ria. RICHARD BURTON climbed its summit in 1861. The volcano last erupted
in 2000.
Camilla In ROMAN MYTHOLOGY, a legendary warrior maiden and favourite
of DIANA. According to VIRGIL, her father dedicated her to Diana and trained
her as a hunter and warrior, and she led a band of warriors that included
women. She fought against AENEAS and was killed as she chased a retreat-
ing soldier.
Camillus
Neapolis (Naples). After the fall of Rome, Campania was ruled by Gaul,
Byzantium, and the Normans; it became part of the Kingdom of Naples
in 1282. It was united with Italy in 1861. Its economy is bolstered by
agriculture, the industrial area around Naples, and tourism.
campanile
Campion, Jane (b. April 30,
Campo Formio
the BRITISH NORTH AMERICA ACT of 1867.
Canadian Alliance French Alliance Canadienne Former con-
Canadian Broadcasting Corp. (CBC) Canadian public broadcast-
ing service, created in 1936 to promote Canadian culture and serve as an
instrument of national unity. It offers French- and English-language pro-
grams over AM and FM radio networks, television networks, cable tele-
vision channels, and shortwave radio. Noted for its news and public affairs
programs, the CBC also presents documentaries, dramas, classical music,
entertainment, and educational programs as well as sports programs.
Canadian Football League (CFL) Major Canadian professional
gridiron FOOTBALL organization, formed in 1958. The league’s Western Con-
ference includes teams from Edmonton, Calgary, British Columbia,
Saskatchewan, and Winnipeg; its Eastern Conference comprises teams
from Hamilton, Montreal, Ottawa, and Toronto. The conference winners
compete for the Grey Cup. The CFL plays a gridiron style of football.
Canadian Labour Congress (CLC) Nationwide association of
labour unions in Canada. The CLC was formed in 1956 by the merger of
the Canadian counterparts to the American Federation of Labor and the
Congress of Industrial Organizations, which merged in the same year (see
AFL-CIO). It represents roughly 3 million unionized workers across
Canada.
Canadian National Railway Co. Corporation created by the
Canadian government in 1918 to operate a number of nationalized rail-
roads (including the old Grand Trunk lines, Intercolonial Railway,
National Transcontinental Railway, and Canadian Northern Railway) as
one of Canada’s two transcontinental railroad systems. Its passenger ser-
vices were taken over by VIA Rail Canada in 1978, and the company was
privatized in 1995. The Canadian National Railway stretches across
Canada from Nova Scotia to Vancouver. It bought the Illinois Central
Corp. in 1999, thus acquiring a railroad network that links Canada to the
Gulf of Mexico.
Canadian Pacific Railway Ltd. (CPR) Privately owned company
Canaletto
Canaris
ceptibility. Triggers include hormones, viruses, smoking, diet, and radia-
tion. Cancer can begin in almost any tissue, including blood (see LEUKEMIA)
and lymph (see LYMPHOMA). When it metastasizes, it remains a cancer of its
tissue of origin. Early diagnosis and treatment increase the chance of cure.
Treatment may include CHEMOTHERAPY, surgery, and RADIATION THERAPY. See
also BLADDER CANCER; BREAST CANCER; CARCINOGEN; COLORECTAL CANCER; KAPOSI SAR-
COMA; LAR YNGEAL CANCER; LUNG CANCER; OVARIAN CANCER; PANCREATIC CANCER;
PROSTATE CANCER; SKIN CANCER; STOMACH CANCER; UTERINE CANCER.
Cancer, Tropic of See TROPIC OF CANCER
Cancún
cannabis
NEOCLASSICISM).
Canso, Strait of or Canso Gut Channel, NOVA SCOTIA, Canada. Sepa-
rating mainland Nova Scotia and CAPE BRETON ISLAND, it is 4.5 mi (23 km)
long and 1 mi (2 km) wide, with depths of 200 ft (60 m). Since 1955 the
7,000-ft (2,100-m) Canso Causeway has linked Cape Breton with the
mainland. A navigation lock can handle most oceangoing vessels.
Cantabria
Cantor, Eddie orig. Edward Israel Iskowitz (b. Jan. 31, 1892,
Cantor
capacitance
Aapek
Capote
He and his followers wore robes with pointed hoods (Italian, cappuccino),
went barefoot, and lived in extreme poverty. Other Franciscans harassed
them, and the pope forbade them to extend their membership outside Italy.
The new order was nearly ruined by the defection of their vicar-general,
Bernardino Ochino, to Protestantism in 1542, but it later grew quickly,
reaching a membership of 17,000 by 1571. It was active in the COUNTER-
REFORMATION in keeping the common people loyal to Catholicism. An inde-
pendent order since 1619, they are known for their missionary and social
work.
capuchin (monkey)
eral chemical formula Cn(H2O)n. The carbon (C) atoms are bonded to
hydrogen atoms (5H), hydroxyl groups (5OH; see FUNCTIONAL GROUP),
and carbonyl groups (5C6O), whose combinations, order, and geomet-
ric arrangement lead to a large number of ISOMERs with the same chemi-
cal formula but different properties. The class is further enlarged because
each isomer has various derivatives: uronic acids, sugars with an oxidized
group; sugar alcohols, sugars with a reduced group; GLYCOSIDEs, com-
pounds of sugars with other molecules containing a hydroxyl group; and
amino sugars, sugars with an amino group (see AMINO ACID).
carbolic acid
carbonyl chloride See PHOSGENE
Carborundum
R. ARKWRIGHT, and JOHANN BODMER.
cardiology Medical specialty dealing with HEART DISEASES and disorders.
It began with the 1749 publication by Jean Baptiste de Sénac of contem-
porary knowledge of the heart. Diagnostic methods improved in the 19th
century, and in 1905 the electrocardiograph was invented. The 20th cen-
tury saw many surgical advances in cardiology, including heart transplants
and the use of ARTIFICIAL HEARTS. Current diagnostic methods include chest
percussion (tapping) and AUSCULTATION, ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY, and echocar-
diography (see ULTRASOUND). Cardiologists provide continuing care of heart
patients, doing basic heart-function studies, supervising therapy, includ-
ing drug therapy, and working closely with heart surgeons.
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) Emergency procedure to
Carducci
Carême
his death. His approximately 15 oratorios
(performed in place of operas during
Lent),
including Baltazar, Ezechia,
Jephte, Jonas, and Judicium extremum
made him the principal oratorio composer of the mid-17th century. He
also wrote some 150 cantatas and nearly 100 motets.
Carl XVI Gustaf Swedish Carl Gustaf Folke Hubertus (b. April
30, 1946, Stockholm, Swed.) King of Sweden from 1973. Grandson of
King Gustav VI Adolf (1882–1973), he became crown prince in 1950, his
father having died in 1947. After studying at military schools, he became
a naval officer. His accession occurred at a time when the role of the
Swedish monarchy was being radically altered; the new constitutional
laws of 1973 left the king with a solely symbolic function rather than a
formal role in the country’s administration.
Carleton, Guy See Guy Carleton, 1st Baron DORCHESTER
Carleton
Carlton, Steve in full Steven Norman Carlton (b. Dec. 22, 1944,
Carmarthen
Carnegie
Carol I
Carpathian Mountains
Carriera
Cartel des Gauches
in Voiron, Isère), the monks distill the liqueur that bears the house’s name.
Carthusian nuns are also strictly cloistered and contemplative.
Cartier
the Mississippi River, wintering in a Sioux village. Though his travel
journal (published 1778) was a huge success, he died penniless.
Cary, (Arthur) Joyce (Lunel) (b. Dec. 7, 1888, Londonderry, Ire.—d.
March 29, 1957, Oxford, Oxfordshire, Eng.) British novelist. Cary stud-
ied art in Edinburgh and Paris before graduating from the University of
Oxford. After serving in West Africa in World War I, he began publish-
ing short stories, then novels, some set in Africa, including An American
Visitor (1933) and Mister Johnson (1939). The Horse’s Mouth (1944), his
best-known novel, was the third in a trilogy in which each volume is nar-
rated by one of three protagonists. Other works include a second trilogy,
A Prisoner of Grace (1952), Except the Lord (1953), and Not Honour
More (1955).
caryatid
Casimir
Bol.?) U.S. outlaw. Taking his name from an older outlaw mentor, Cassidy
was a cattle rustler and a robber from the mid-1880s. In 1900 he became
the criminal partner of Harry Longabaugh, the “Sundance Kid” (1870–
1909?), whose nickname derived from a town where he had once been
imprisoned. They became the foremost members of the Wild Bunch, a
group of bank and train robbers. The two eluded Pinkerton detectives by
escaping to South America in 1901. They bought a ranch in Argentina but
returned to a life of outlawry in 1906. In 1909, trapped by soldiers in
Bolivia, Sundance was mortally wounded, and Cassidy shot himself. The
time, place, and circumstances of their deaths vary widely in different
accounts.
Cassini, Gian Domenico (b. June 8, 1625, Perinaldo, Republic of
Genoa—d. Sept. 14, 1712, Paris, France) Italian-born French astronomer.
His early studies were mainly observations of the Sun, but, after obtain-
ing more powerful telescopes, he turned his attention to the planets. He
calculated Jupiter’s and Mars’s rotational periods and compiled a table of
the positions of Jupiter’s satellites. His observations of the Moon (1671–
79) led to his compiling a large map. In 1683, after a study of the ZODIA-
CAL LIGHT, he concluded it was of cosmic origin. He discovered four of
Saturn’s moons: Iapetus (1671), Rhea (1672), Tethys (1684), and Dione
(1684). The dark gap between two of Saturn’s main rings (Cassini’s divi-
sion) is named for him.
Cassiodorus
ferentiation of larvae into various castes is often determined by diet,
though hormonal and environmental factors can also play a role.
Castelo Branco
beanlike seeds. There are hundreds of natural forms and many horticul-
tural varieties of this species.
castration or neutering Removal of the TESTES. The procedure stops
most production of the hormone TESTOSTERONE. If done before PUBERTY, it pre-
vents the development of functioning adult sex organs. Castration after
sexual maturity makes the sex organs shrink and stop functioning, ending
sperm formation and sexual interest and behaviour. Livestock and pets are
castrated to keep them from reproducing (see STERILIZATION) or to create a
more docile animal. In humans, castration has been used for both cultural
(see EUNUCH, CASTRATO) and medical (e.g., for testicular cancer) reasons.
castrato
catalpa
Cateau-Cambrésis
spired with her lover, GRIGOR Y G., COUNT ORLOV, to force Peter to abdi-
cate (he was murdered soon after) and have herself proclaimed empress.
In her 34-year reign she led Russia into full participation in European
political and cultural life. With her ministers she reorganized the admin-
istration and law of the Russian Empire and extended Russian territory,
adding the Crimea and much of Poland. Though she had once intended
to emancipate the serfs, she instead strengthened the system she had once
condemned as inhuman. She had great energy and wide interests, and her
personal life was notable for her many lovers, including GRIGOR Y POTEMKIN.
Catherine de Médicis
of society. CICERO, then consul, learned of the conspiracy; with Senate
approval, he caught and executed a group of the plotters in Rome, and
later sent the army to defeat and kill Catiline in northern Italy (62).
cation
Cattell
See also MACHISMO; PERSONALISMO.
Caulaincourt
cavalry
into the 1940s. JACK BENNY, ED SULLIVAN, LUCILLE BALL, MAR Y TYLER MOORE, and
CCC See CIVILIAN CONSERVATION CORPS
CCD in full charge-coupled device SEMICONDUCTOR device in which
the individual semiconductor components are connected so that the elec-
trical charge at the output of one device provides the input to the next
device. Because they can store electrical charges, CCDs can be used as
memory devices, but they are slower than RAMs. CCDs are sensitive to
light, and are therefore used as the light-detecting components in video
and digital cameras and in optical scanners.
CD See CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT
CD See COMPACT DISC
CD-ROM in full compact disc read-only memory Type of com-
puter storage medium that is read optically (e.g., by a LASER). A CD-ROM
drive uses a low-power laser beam to read digitized (binary) data that have
been encoded onto an optical disc in the form of tiny pits, then feeds the
data to a computer for processing. Because it uses digital data, a CD-ROM
can store images and sound in addition to text and is thus used in video
and audio devices to store music, graphics, and movies (see COMPACT DISC).
Unlike
conventional magnetic-
storage
technologies
(e.g.,
DISKS), CD-ROM drives cannot write
information (that is, accept the input
of new data), hence the tag “read-
only.” Recordable compact discs
(called CD-R) must be written on a
CD-R recorder and can be played on
any CD-ROM drive.
CDC See CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
AND PREVENTION
CeauÃescu
See also WHITE CEDAR.
Cedar Breaks National Monument Preserve, southwestern Utah,
U.S. Established as a national monument in 1933, it consists of a vast
natural amphitheatre (10 sq mi [26 sq km]) eroded in a limestone escarp-
ment. Iron and manganese oxide impurities in the cliff produce an amaz-
ing variety of colours that change constantly.
Cedar Rapids City (pop., 2000: 120,758), eastern Iowa, U.S. Origi-
nally called Rapids City, it was settled in the 1830s next to rapids of the
CEDAR RIVER, a source of waterpower. With the coming of the railroads, it
developed as a grain and livestock market. Neighbouring Kingston was
annexed in 1870, and Kenwood Park in 1926. Its manufactures include
electronic equipment and farm machinery. It was the home of the artist
GRANT WOOD.
Cela (Trulock)
celiac
popularity for its lively account of his tumultuous life and its vivid pic-
ture of Renaissance Italy.
cello
cenotaph
362 I
Central America (cid:2) Central Pacific Railroad
Sea. It includes GUATEMALA, BELIZE, HONDURAS, EL SALVADOR, NICARAGUA,
Mexico: QUINTANA ROO, YUCATÁN, CAMPECHE, TABASCO, and CHIAPAS. Area:
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
SCYTHIAN ART.
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Principal intelligence and coun-
terintelligence agency of the U.S., established in 1947 as a successor to
the World War II-era OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES. The law limits its activi-
ties to foreign countries; it is prohibited from gathering intelligence on
U.S. soil, which is a responsibility of the FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION.
Officially a part of the U.S. Defense Department, it is responsible for pre-
paring analyses for the NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL. Its budget is kept secret.
Though intelligence gathering is its chief occupation, the CIA has also
been involved in many covert operations, including the expulsion of
MOHAMMAD MOSADDEQ from Iran (1953), the attempted BAY OF PIGS INVASION
of Cuba (1961), and support of the Nicaraguan CONTRAs in the 1980s.
central limit theorem In statistics, any of several fundamental theo-
rems in PROBABILITY. Originally known as the law of errors, in its classic
form it states that the sum of a set of independent RANDOM VARIABLES will
approach a NORMAL DISTRIBUTION regardless of the distribution of the indi-
vidual variables themselves, given certain general conditions. Further, the
mean (see MEAN, MEDIAN, AND MODE) of the normal distribution will coin-
cide with the (arithmetic) mean of the (statistical) means of each random
variable.
central nervous system See NERVOUS SYSTEM
Central Pacific Railroad U.S. railroad company founded in 1861 by
a group of California merchants including MARK HOPKINS and LELAND STAN-
central processing unit See CPU
Central Treaty Organization (CENTO) originally Middle East
Treaty Organization or Baghdad Pact Organization Mutual-
security organization, originally composed of Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Pakistan,
and Britain. It was formed in 1955, at the urging of the U.S. and Britain,
to counter the threat of Soviet expansion into the Middle East. CENTO
was never very effective. Iraq withdrew after its anti-Soviet monarchy was
overthrown in 1959. In that same year the U.S. became an associate
member, and CENTO’s headquarters were moved to Ankara, Tur. After
the fall of Mohammad Reza Shah PAHLAVI in 1979, Iran withdrew and
CENTO was dissolved.
Central Valley Spanish Valle Central
CELAIN, POTTER Y, STONEWARE, TERRA-COTTA.
Ceratium
CERN in full Organisation Européenne pour la Recherche
Nucléaire formerly Conseil Européen pour la Recherche
Cernunnos
Cétsamain See BELTANE
Cetshwayo
Chaeronea
Chajang Yulsa
early as the 7th century BC. It established colonies in Macedonia, Italy, and
Sicily and was a base for campaigns against Athens until 411 BC. ARISTOTLE
died in Chalcis in 322 BC. The city became part of Greece in 1830.
chalybite See SIDERITE
Chambal River
Chambers, (David) Whittaker orig. Jay Vivian Chambers (b.
Chambord
when England and France were at war, and he was taken prisoner. In 1632
the colony was restored to France, and in 1633 Champlain made his last
voyage to Quebec, where he lived until his death.
champlevé
Chang Chih-tung See ZHANG ZHIDONG
Chang Chü-cheng See ZHANG JUZHENG
Chang Jiang See YANGTZE RIVER
Chang Tao-Ling See ZHANG DAOLING
Chang Tsai See ZHANG ZAI
Chang Tso-lin See ZHANG ZUOLIN
Chang’an
chanson de geste
a pamphlet arguing that the divisions among abolitionists stemmed from
their disagreements over women’s rights.
Chapultepec
Charles, Ray orig. Ray Charles Robinson (b. Sept. 23, 1930,
Charles I Hungarian Karoly known as Charles Robert of Anjou
376 I
Charles III (cid:2) Charles X Gustav
Charles III known as Charles the Fat
Charles IV orig. Wenceslas known as Charles of Luxembourg
Charles VI known as Charles the Well-Beloved or Charles the
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Charles XIV John Swedish Karl Johan orig. Jean-Baptiste
Bernadotte (b. Jan. 26, 1763, Pau, France—d. March 8, 1844, Stock-
holm, Swed.) King of Sweden and Norway (1818–44). He became an
ardent supporter of the French Revolution and rose rapidly in the army
ranks to brigadier general (1794). Named marshal of France in 1804, he
supported NAPOLEON in several campaigns (1805–09) but subsequently
shifted his allegiance. In 1810 he was invited to become crown prince of
Sweden; taking the name of Charles John, he assumed control of the gov-
ernment. He helped defeat Napoleon at the Battle of LEIPZIG, then defeated
France’s ally Denmark, forcing that country to transfer Norway to the
Swedish crown. On the death of CHARLES XIII in 1818, Charles John became
king of Sweden and Norway. His foreign policy led to a long and favour-
able period of peace.
Charles Albert Italian Carlo Alberto (b. Oct. 2, 1798, Turin, Pied-
mont, French Republic—d. July 28, 1849, Oporto, Port.) King of
Sardinia-Piedmont (1831–49). A member of the house of SAVOY, he
ascended the throne after the death of Charles Felix in 1831. He mitigated
the harsh administration of his country and accelerated its economic and
social development. The spread of revolutionary ideas forced him to grant
a statute for representative government in 1848. After the election of PIUS
IX as pope and the Austrian occupation of Ferrara, he sought to lead the
liberation of Italy. He went to war against Austria in 1848 and again in
1849, but, after his defeat in the Battle of NOVARA, he abdicated in favor
of his son, VICTOR EMMANUEL II.
Charles Edward,
the Young Pretender orig. Charles
Edward Louis Philip Casimir Stuart known as Bonnie Prince
Charlie (b. Dec. 31, 1720, Rome—d. Jan. 31, 1788, Rome) Claimant to
the British throne. He was the son of the royal pretender JAMES EDWARD and
grandson of the exiled JAMES II of England. Seeking to regain the throne, in
1745 the “Young Pretender” landed in Scotland, where he raised an army
of 2,400 among the clans. After taking Edinburgh and routing the English
at Prestonpans, he crossed the English border and reached Derby, but a
lack of strong support from the JACOBITEs and the French forced his retreat
into Scotland. He was decisively defeated at the Battle of CULLODEN (1746)
and, aided by Flora Macdonald (1722–90) and disguised as her maid,
escaped to France. He wandered about Europe trying to revive his cause,
but his debauched behaviour alienated his friends. He settled in Italy in
1766. He later became romanticized in ballads and legends.
Charles Martel
the centre of U.S. gold production. In the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR it was the
site of a Confederate naval yard. Presidents ANDREW JACKSON and JAMES
POLK were born nearby and received their early schooling there. Its indus-
try includes textiles, machinery, and chemical production, and it is the
site of several institutions of higher education.
Charlotte orig. Charlotte Sophia of Mecklenburg-Strelitz (b.
May 19, 1744—d. Nov. 17, 1818) Queen consort of GEORGE III of England.
In 1761 she was selected unseen after the British king asked for a review
of all eligible German Protestant princesses. The marriage was a success,
and the couple had 15 children, including GEORGE IV. After the king was
declared insane (1811), Parliament turned to the future George IV, while
Charlotte was given custody of her husband.
Charlotte Amalie
membership. Born amid an economic depression, the movement rose to
national importance under the leadership of FEARGUS O’CONNOR. Parlia-
ment refused to take action on three Chartist petitions presented to it, and
the movement declined after 1848.
Chartres
RALTY and Kuiu islands on the east and the Chicagof and Baranof islands
on the west, it is 3–10 mi (5–16 km) wide. It forms part of the INSIDE PAS-
SAGE between Alaska and Washington state.
Chattahoochee River
Chavín de Huántar
chelate
tions. See also BIOLOGICAL WARFARE.
chemin de fer
Nationalist Party’s candidate, ending that party’s 55-year rule of Taiwan.
In 2004 Chen was narrowly reelected, the vote coming one day after he
and his running mate, Vice President Annette Lu (Lu Hsiu-lien), were shot
and slightly wounded while campaigning in Tainan.
Chenab
Chernov
Cheshire
Chetumal
Chi-lin See JILIN
ch’i-lin See QILIN
Chi-nan See JINAN
Chiang Ching-kuo or Jiang Jingguo
Chichén Itzá
chicken One of the most widely domesticated poultry species (Gallus
gallus), raised worldwide for its meat and eggs. Descended from the wild
red JUNGLE FOWL of India, chickens have been domesticated for at least 4,000
years. Not until the 19th century did chicken meat and eggs become mass-
production commodities. Modern high-volume poultry farms, with rows of
cages stacked indoors for control of heat, light, and humidity, began to pro-
liferate in Britain c. 1920 and in the U.S. after World War II (see FACTOR Y
FARMING). Females are raised for meat and eggs; immature males are cas-
trated to become meat birds called capons. See also PRAIRIE CHICKEN.
chickenpox or varicella
Childebert
Chiloé
Ch’in tomb (cid:2) China Sea
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
wan into two sections. The northern section is the East China Sea, or
Eastern Sea, which covers an area of some 290,000 sq mi (751,100 sq
km), has a maximum depth of 8,912 ft (2,717 m), and is enclosed by east-
ern China, South Korea, the Japanese island of KYUSHU, the RYUKYU ISLANDS,
and Taiwan. The southern section is the South China Sea, often called
simply the China Sea, which covers an area of 1,423,000 sq mi (3,685,000
sq km), has a maximum depth of about 16,000 ft (5,000 m), and is
enclosed by southeastern China, Taiwan, the Philippines, Borneo, and
mainland Southeast Asia.
chinchilla
person can recognize 3,000–4,000 characters. Efforts have been made to
reduce the number of characters and to simplify their form, though the
fact that they can be read by a speaker of any Chinese language and their
inextricable link with China’s 3,000-year-old culture makes abandonment
of the system unlikely. Chinese characters have also been adapted to write
Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese.
Ch’ing dynasty See QING DYNASTY
Chinggis Khan See GENGHIS KHAN
Ch’ing-hai See QINGHAI
Ch’ing-hai Hu See KOKO NOR
chinoiserie
chiropractic
Chlotar
choline
words of the Lutheran chorales were often Latin plainsong hymn texts
translated into the vernacular. The melodies were often borrowed from
secular song and therefore displayed great melodic and structural simplic-
ity. In modern times the chorale is considered to be a musical setting,
usually polyphonic (multivoiced), of a traditional religious text.
chord Grouping of three or more musical tones, especially as sounded
simultaneously. The tones C-E–G constitute a “C major chord,” or “C
major triad.” Chords may comprise any number of separate tones, and
may be highly dissonant (see CONSONANCE AND DISSONANCE). The term HAR-
MONY is often used loosely as a synonym.
chordate
400 I
Christchurch (cid:2) Christian Social Union
Christian IV, detail of an oil painting by
Pieter Isaacsz, 1612; in Frederiksborg
Castle, Denmark
COURTESY OF DET NATIONALHISTORISKE MUSEUM PÅ
FREDERIKSBORG, DEN.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Christian, Charlie orig. Charles Christian (b. July 29, 1916, Bon-
Christian Democratic Party (Italy) See ITALIAN POPULAR PARTY
Christian Democratic Union (CDU) German political party advo-
also KONRAD ADENAUER; CHRISTIAN DEMOCRACY.
Christian Science Monitor, The Daily newspaper of national and
international news and features, published Monday through Friday in Bos-
ton under the auspices of the Church of Christ, Scientist (see CHRISTIAN
SCIENCE). Established in 1908 at the urging of MAR Y BAKER EDDY as a pro-
test against the sensationalism of the popular press, it became one of the
most respected U.S. newspapers, famous for its thoughtful treatment of
the news and for the quality of its assessments of political, social, and
economic developments. It strictly limits the kinds of advertising it
accepts. It maintains its own bureaus to gather news abroad and publishes
a weekly world edition. The newspaper won its sixth Pulitzer Prize in
1996, in the category of international reporting.
Christian Social Union (CSU) Conservative German political party
that was founded in Bavaria, West Germany, in 1946 by Roman Catholic
Christine de Pisan or Chris-
tine de Pizan
and Protestant groups. It was committed to free enterprise, federalism,
and a united Europe that would operate under Christian principles. From
1946 it held the government of Bavaria continuously, except in 1954–57.
In national elections it usually cooperated with the CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATIC
UNION.
Christian socialism Social and political movement originating in
mid-19th-century Europe. Christian socialists attempted to combine the
fundamental aims of socialism with the religious and ethical convictions
of Christianity, promoting cooperation over competition as a means of
helping the poor. The term was coined in Britain in 1848 after the failure
of the reform movement known as CHARTISM. Christian socialism found
followers in France and Germany, though the German group, led by Adolf
Stoecker, combined its activities with violent ANTI-SEMITISM. Although the
movement died out in the U.S. in the early 20th century, it retains an
important following in Europe.
Christiania See OSLO
Christie, Dame Agatha (Mary Clarissa) (b. Sept. 15, 1890,
Christus
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE’s Henry VI.
chronometer
in 1945. After the war he commanded the Soviet occupation forces in
Germany (1949–53). He headed the Kiev military district (1953–60) and
thereafter held a variety of military assignments in Moscow.
chukar
Churchill, Sir Winston (Leonard Spencer) (b. Nov. 30, 1874,
ATLANTIC CHARTER and at the CAIRO, CASABLANCA, and TEHRAN conferences.
Churrigueresque
known species are in the family Cicadidae and are found in tropical
deserts, grasslands, and forests. Males produce loud noises by vibrating
membranes near the base of the abdomen. Most North American cicadas
produce rhythmical ticks, buzzes, or whines, though the “song” of some
species is musical. The species are easily distinguishable by song, behav-
iour, and appearance. Periodic cicadas (species that occur in large num-
bers in chronologically and geographically isolated broods) appear in
regular cycles, including the well-known 17-year cicada (often errone-
ously called the 17-year LOCUST) and 13-year cicada. The larvae (nymphs)
burrow into the ground, where they remain for 17 or 13 years, feeding
on juices sucked from roots; they then emerge in large numbers to live
aboveground as adults for a single week.
Cicero
Panhandle, southeastern Colorado, and southwestern Kansas, the river-
bed in this area is often dry and is known as the Dry Cimarron. The SANTA
FE TRAIL coursed along its valley for 100 mi (160 km), and travelers knew
the Oklahoma Panhandle as the “Cimarron Cutoff.”
Cimmerian
to light. The controlling mechanism for these cyclic processes within the
body is thought to be the HYPOTHALAMUS. Any change in the circadian cycle
(such as JET LAG and other conditions associated with travel) requires a cer-
tain period for readjustment.
Circassian
cirrhosis
ment and served the interests of the nation-state. The INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
further transformed city life, as factory cities blossomed rapidly in
England, northwestern Europe, and the northeastern U.S. By the mid-20th
century, 30–60% of a country’s population might be living in its major
urban centers. With the rise of the automobile came the growth of sub-
urbs and urban sprawl, as factories, offices, and residences erected in ear-
lier periods became aged and obsolete. Today many cities suffer from lack
of adequate housing, sanitation, recreational space, and transportation
facilities, and face problems of inner-city decay or burgeoning shanty-
towns. Local governments have sought
to alleviate these problems
through URBAN PLANNING.
Ciudad Guayana
nation caused many supporters to withdraw. In the succeeding decades,
leaders sought power through elective office and substantive economic
and educational gains through AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.
civil service Body of government officials employed in civil occupa-
tions that are neither political nor judicial. In well-ordered societies, they
are usually recruited and promoted on the basis of a merit-and-seniority
system, which may include examinations; elsewhere, corruption and
patronage are more important factors. They often serve as neutral advis-
ers to elected officials and political appointees. Though not responsible
for making policy, they are charged with its execution. The civil service
originated in the earliest known Middle Eastern societies; the modern
European civil services date to 17th- and 18th-century Prussia and the
electors of Brandenburg. In the U.S., senior officials change with each
new administration. In Europe, regulations were established in the 19th
century to minimize favouritism and to ensure a wide range of knowledge
and skills among civil service officers. See also CHINESE EXAMINATION SYS-
TEM; SPOILS SYSTEM.
Civil Service Act, Pendleton See PENDLETON CIVIL SERVICE ACT
Civil War See AMERICAN CIVIL WAR
Civil Wars, English See ENGLISH CIVIL WARS
Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) (1933–42) U.S. unemploy-
forms the basis of the legal systems of The Netherlands, Belgium, Lux-
embourg, Italy, Spain, most of France’s former possessions overseas, and
many Latin American countries. German civil law prevails in Austria,
Switzerland, the Scandinavian countries, and certain countries outside
Europe, such as Japan, that have westernized their legal systems. The term
is also used to distinguish the law that applies to private rights from the
law that applies to criminal matters. See also CRIMINAL LAW; TORT.
civil liberty Freedom from arbitrary interference in one’s pursuits by
individuals or by government. The term is usually used in the plural. Civil
liberties are protected explicitly in the constitutions of most democratic
countries. (In authoritarian countries, civil liberties are often formally
guaranteed in a constitution but ignored in practice.) In the U.S., civil
liberties are guaranteed by the BILL OF RIGHTS and the 13th, 14th, and 15th
Amendments to the CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. The Constitution’s
13th Amendment prohibits slavery and involuntary servitude; the 14th
bars the application of any law that would abridge the “privileges and
immunities” of U.S. citizens or deprive any person of “life, liberty, or
property…without DUE PROCESS of law” or deny any person EQUAL PROTEC-
TION under the law; and the 15th guarantees the right of all U.S. citizens
to vote. The related term CIVIL RIGHT is often used to refer to one or more
of these liberties or indirectly to the obligation of government to protect
certain classes of people from violations of one or more of their civil lib-
erties (e.g., the obligation to protect racial minorities from discrimination
on the basis of race). In the U.S., civil rights are protected by the CIVIL
RIGHTS ACT OF 1964 and subsequent legislation. See also AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION.
under Pres. LYNDON B. JOHNSON. See also CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT.
civil rights movement Movement for racial equality in the U.S. that,
through nonviolent protest, broke the pattern of racial segregation in the
South and achieved equal rights legislation for blacks. Following the U.S.
Supreme Court decision in BROWN V. BOARD OF EDUCATION OF TOPEKA (1954),
African American and white supporters attempted to end entrenched seg-
regationist practices. When ROSA PARKS was arrested in 1955 in Montgom-
ery, Ala., an African American boycott of the bus system was led by
MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR., and RALPH ABERNATHY. In the early 1960s the Stu-
dent Nonviolent Coordinating Committee led boycotts and sit-ins to
desegregate many public facilities. Using the nonviolent methods of
MOHANDAS K. GANDHI, the movement spread, forcing the desegregation of
department stores, supermarkets, libraries, and movie theatres. The Deep
South remained adamant in its opposition to most desegregation mea-
sures, often violently; protesters were attacked and occasionally killed.
Their efforts culminated in a march on Washington, D.C., in 1963 to sup-
port civil rights legislation. Following the assassination of JOHN F. KENNEDY,
Pres. LYNDON B. JOHNSON persuaded Congress to pass the CIVIL RIGHTS ACT
OF 1964, a victory that was followed by the VOTING RIGHTS ACT in 1965.
After 1965, militant groups such as the BLACK PANTHER PARTY split off from
the civil rights movement, and riots in black ghettos and King’s assassi-
Clair, René orig. René-Lucien Chomette (b. Nov. 11, 1898, Paris,
CLAM, GEODUCK, QUAHOG, and soft-shell
clam.
clan Kinship group based on actual
or purported DESCENT from a common
ancestor, as traced through the male (patriclan) or the female (matriclan)
line. Clans are normally exogamous, marriage within the clan being
regarded as INCEST. Clans may segment into subclans or lineages, and
genealogical records and myths may be altered to incorporate new mem-
bers who lack KINSHIP ties with the clan. Clan membership may be useful
in ensuring mutual support and defense as well as in the mediation of
disputes over property rights and the mode of residence after MARRIAGE.
Some clans express their unity by means of a common emblem. See also
EXOGAMY AND ENDOGAMY.
clapboard
Clark, Champ orig. James Beauchamp Clark (b. March 7, 1850,
near Lawrenceburg, Ky., U.S.—d. March 2, 1921, Washington, D.C.) U.S.
politician. Clark moved to Missouri in 1876 and settled at Bowling Green.
He was successively a newspaper editor, a prosecuting attorney, and a
state legislator; he was then elected to the U.S. House of Representatives,
where he served 13 terms (1893–95, 1897–1921). A follower of WILLIAM
JENNINGS BR YAN, he supported agrarian measures. As a member of the
House rules committee in 1910, he led the revolt against JOSEPH CANNON
and succeeded him as speaker (1911–19). At the 1912 Democratic Party
convention, Clark was a leading contender for the presidential nomina-
tion until Bryan switched his support to Woodrow Wilson.
Clark, Dick in full Richard Wagstaff Clark (b. Nov. 30, 1929,
Helen Clark, 2005.
SEAN GALLUP/GETTY IMAGES
clarinet (cid:2) class
1981 and served as its chairman 1982–94, building it into a billion-dollar
company that produced workstations for graphics-intensive applications.
In 1994 he cofounded Netscape Communications, whose graphical inter-
face Web browser revolutionized the Internet by making it easy to access
Internet documents.
Clark (of Saltwood), Kenneth (Mackenzie) Clark, Baron (b.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Claude Lorrain
(see THERMAE), AMPHITHEATERS, and TRIUMPHAL ARCHES. Classical architecture
Judaea a province. He encouraged
urbanization, spent lavishly on pub-
lic works, and extended Roman citi-
zenship
throughout
empire.
Having executed his scheming third
wife, Valeria Messalina, in 48, he
married his niece AGRIPPINA THE
YOUNGER. She pressured Claudius
into naming her son Lucius (later
NERO) heir instead of his own son
Britannicus. Claudius may have been
poisoned by Agrippina.
Claudius
Caecus
in 1901 by the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty, under which the British govern-
ment agreed to allow the U.S. to construct and control the canal.
Clazomenae
Clement of Alexandria, Saint Latin Titus Flavius Clemens (b.
Clemente
Clermont
Clinton, George (b. July 26, 1739, Little Britain, N.Y.—d. April 20,
1812, Washington, D.C., U.S.) U.S. politician, fourth vice president of
the U.S. (1805–12). A veteran of the French and Indian War, he was a
leading member of the New York assembly (1768–75) and a delegate to
the CONTINENTAL CONGRESS (1775). As governor of New York (1777–95,
1801–04), he was a forceful leader and able administrator; he led the
opposition to the state’s adoption of the U.S. Constitution. A supporter of
THOMAS JEFFERSON, he was twice elected vice president (with Jefferson and
JAMES MADISON); he died in office.
Clinton, Hillary Rodham orig. Hillary Diane Rodham (b. Oct.
cliometrics
Cline, Patsy orig. Virginia Patterson Hensley (b. Sept. 8, 1932,
Clinton, Bill in full William Jefferson Clinton orig. William
Clitunno River
Close
Cluj-Napoca
also HYDRA; PORTUGUESE MAN-OF-WAR; SEA ANEMONE.
Cnidus
cobia
cocaine HETEROCYCLIC COMPOUND (C17H21NO4), an ALKALOID obtained from
coccus
Cockpit Country Region, west-
Cocteau
diagnosis, codependency is a psychological syndrome noted in relatives
or partners of alcoholics or substance abusers.
codex Manuscript BOOK, especially of Scripture, early literature, or
ancient mythological or historical annals. The earliest type of manuscript
in the form of a modern book (i.e., a collection of pages stitched together
along one side), the codex replaced earlier rolls of papyrus and wax tab-
lets. Among its advantages, it could be opened at once to any point in the
text, it permitted writing on both sides of the leaf, and it could contain
long texts. The oldest extant Greek codex is the Codex Sinaiticus (4th
century AD), a biblical manuscript. Codices were developed separately by
pre-Columbian Mesoamericans after c. AD 1000.
Codium
discharged to the condenser, which would waste the remaining energy in
the steam. The steam at the higher pressure can provide large amounts of
lower-temperature energy for heating buildings or evaporating brine in a
chemical plant. Considerable overall energy savings can be obtained by
cogeneration. See also STEAM ENGINE.
cogito, ergo sum Latin “I think, therefore I am” Dictum coined
cognac
also CAISSON.
Cohan
Coleman, (Randolph Denard) Ornette (b. March 9, 1930, Fort
Coleraine
Colima
colloid
Colonial National Historical Park Historical reservation, south-
small islands. See also DECOLONIZATION, DEPENDENCY, IMPERIALISM.
colonnade Row of columns generally supporting an ENTABLATURE, used
either as an independent feature (e.g., a covered walkway) or as part of a
building (e.g., a PORTICO). The earliest colonnades appear in the temple
architecture of ancient Greece. In a BASILICA, colonnades are used to sepa-
rate the side aisles from the central space. See also STOA.
colony In antiquity, any of the new settlements established in territory
conquered by the Greeks (8th–6th century BC), ALEXANDER THE GREAT (4th
century BC), and the Romans (4th century BC–AD 2nd century). Greek
colonies extended to Italy, Sicily, Spain,
the eastern Mediterranean
(including Egypt), and the Black Sea. Alexander pushed even farther into
Central Asia, South Asia, and Egypt. Roman colonization covered much
of the same area and regions south to northern Africa, west to Spain, and
north to Britain and Germany. Reasons for colonizing included expansion
of trade, acquisition of raw materials, resolution of political unrest or
overpopulation, and craving for land and rewards. Colonies retained ties
and loyalty to Rome, though rebelliousness was not uncommon. In Roman
colonies after 177 BC, colonists retained Roman citizenship and could
exercise full political rights. Ancient colonization spread Hellenic and
Roman culture to the far reaches of the empires, often assimilating local
populations, some of whom acquired Roman citizenship.
colony In zoology, a group of organisms of one SPECIES that live and
interact closely with each other in an organized fashion. A colony differs
from an aggregation, in which the group has no cooperative or organized
function. Colonies of social insects (e.g., ants, bees) usually include CASTES
with different responsibilities. Many birds form temporary breeding colo-
nies, in some cases to stimulate reproductive activities, in others to make
the best use of a limited breeding habitat and to coordinate efforts in pro-
tecting nests from predators. Certain mammals that live in close groups
are said to be colonial, though they lack cooperative activities and each
maintains a territory.
Colophon
colostomy
COLUMNIATION, ORDER.
coma Complete lack of conscious-
ness, with loss of reaction to stimu-
lus and of spontaneous nervous activity. It is usually associated with
cerebral injury of metabolic or physical origin. Simple CONCUSSIONs cause
short losses of consciousness. Coma from lack of oxygen may last sev-
eral weeks and is often fatal. Coma caused by STROKE can be sudden, while
that caused by metabolic abnormalities (as in DIABETES MELLITUS) or cerebral
TUMOURs comes on gradually. Treatment depends on the cause.
Comana
Columbus, Christopher Italian Cristoforo Colombo Spanish
Cristóbal Colón (b. between Aug. 26 and Oct. 31?, 1451, Genoa—d.
May 20, 1506, Valladolid, Spain) Genoese navigator and explorer whose
transatlantic voyages opened the way for European exploration, exploi-
tation, and colonization of the Americas. He began his career as a young
seaman in the Portuguese merchant marine. In 1492 he obtained the spon-
sorship of the Spanish monarchs FERDINAND II and ISABELLA I for an attempt
to reach Asia by sailing westward over what was presumed to be open
Comaneci
SCHULZ. See also COMIC BOOK.
Cominform in full Communist Information Bureau Agency of
international communism founded under Soviet auspices in 1947. Its
original members were the Communist Parties of the Soviet Union, Bul-
garia, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Yugoslavia, France,
and Italy, but Yugoslavia was expelled in 1948. The Cominform’s activi-
ties consisted mainly of publishing propaganda to encourage international
communist solidarity. It was dissolved by Soviet initiative in 1956 as part
of a Soviet program of reconciliation with Yugoslavia.
Comintern or Communist International or Third Interna-
Comitia Centuriata
Commodus in full Caesar Marcus Aurelius Commodus
Antoninus Augustus
Lucius Aelius Aurelius Com-
orig.
modus (b. Aug. 31, 161, Lanu-
vium, Latium—d. Dec. 31, 192)
Roman emperor (AD 177–92). He
ruled with his father, MARCUS AURE-
LIUS, until the latter’s death in 180;
recalled from the frontier, Commo-
dus plunged into a life of dissipation
in Rome. After his sister tried to have
him killed (182), he executed the
senators involved and began ruling
capriciously. His brutality stirred
unrest that ended years of Roman
stability and prosperity. He renamed
Colonia
Commodiana
(“Colony of Commodus”). Physi-
cally impressive, he claimed he was
Hercules and performed as a gladia-
tor. His mistress and advisers had
him strangled, ending the Antonine
dynasty.
common cold See common COLD
common fox See RED FOX
common gallinule See MOORHEN
common law Body of law based on custom and general principles and
that, embodied in case law, serves as precedent or is applied to situations
not covered by statute. Under the common-law system, when a court
decides and reports its decision concerning a particular case, the case
becomes part of the body of law and can be used in later cases involving
similar matters. This use of precedents is known as STARE DECISIS. Common
law has been administered in the courts of England since the Middle Ages;
it is also found in the U.S. and in most of the British Commonwealth. It
is distinguished from CIVIL LAW.
common-law marriage Marriage that is without a civil or religious
ceremony and is based on the parties’ agreement to consider themselves
married and usually also on their cohabitation for a period of time. Most
jurisdictions no longer allow this type of marriage to be formed, though
they may recognize such marriages formed before a certain date or formed
in ajurisdiction that permits such marriages.
common-lead dating See URANIUM-THORIUM-LEAD DATING
Common Market See EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
Common Pleas, Court of English court of law founded in 1178 to
hear civil disputes. Under the MAGNA CARTA (1215), it attained jurisdic-
tion separate from the King’s (Queen’s) Court, though its decisions were
subject to review by the latter. Beginning in the 15th century, it competed
with the King’s (Queen’s) Court and the Court of EXCHEQUER for COMMON-
LAW business. By the 19th century, the complexity of overlapping juris-
dictional rules had become unbearable, and all three courts were replaced
(under the Judicature Act of 1873) by the Supreme Court of Judicature,
which remains the court of general jurisdiction in England and Wales.
Common Prayer, Book of See BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER
common rorqual See FIN WHALE
Commoner, Barry (b. May 28, 1917, Brooklyn, N.Y.) U.S. biologist
and educator. He studied at Harvard University and taught at Washington
University and Queens College. His warnings, since the 1950s, of the
environmental threats posed by modern technology (including nuclear
weapons, use of pesticides and other toxic chemicals, and ineffective
waste management) in such works as his classic Science and Survival
(1966) made him one of the foremost environmentalist spokesmen of his
time. He was a third-party candidate for U.S. president in 1980.
Commons, House of Popularly elected lower house of the bicameral
British PARLIAMENT. Passage of legislation is its primary function. Because
it alone has the power to levy taxes and allocate expenditures, it is Brit-
ain’s chief legislative authority. It originated in the late 13th century, when
landholders and other property owners began sending representatives to
Parliament to present grievances and petitions to the king and to accept
commitments to the payment of taxes. It was the less powerful house until
1911, when the Reform Bill of that year gave it the power to override the
HOUSE OF LORDS. The party with the greatest representation in the Com-
mons forms the government, and the PRIME MINISTER chooses the CABINET from
the party’s members. There are 646 members, elected from single-
member districts. See also Canadian PARLIAMENT; PARLIAMENTAR Y DEMOCRACY.
Commons, John R(ogers) (b. Oct. 13, 1862, Hollandsburg, Ohio,
U.S.—d. May 11, 1945, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.) U.S. economist. He taught
at the University of Wisconsin (1904–32) and published works such as A
Documentary History of American Industrial Society (10 vol., 1910–11)
and A History of Labor in the United States (4 vol., 1918–35), in which
he linked the evolution of the U.S. labour movement to changes in the
market structure. He drafted reform legislation for Wisconsin and worked
for the federal government in areas including civil service and worker’s
compensation.
commonwealth Body politic founded on law for the common “weal,”
or good. The term was often used by 17th-century writers to signify an
organized political community, its meaning thus being similar to the mod-
ern meaning of state or nation. Today it primarily refers to the COMMON-
WEALTH. Four U.S. states (Kentucky, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and
Virginia) call themselves commonwealths, a distinction in name only.
Puerto Rico has been a commonwealth rather than a state since 1952; its
residents, though U.S. citizens, have only a nonvoting representative in
Congress and pay no federal taxes.
Commonwealth or Commonwealth of Nations Free associa-
See also BRITISH EMPIRE.
Commonwealth Games Quadrennial sports competition for coun-
tries of the British Commonwealth. The inaugural meeting was called the
British Empire Games and was held in Hamilton, Ont., Can., in 1930.
The Games include athletics (TRACK AND FIELD), GYMNASTICS, BOWLS, and SWIM-
MING events for both men and women, and BOXING, CYCLING, SHOOTING, WEIGHT
LIFTING, and WRESTLING for men only. ROWING, BADMINTON, and FENCING have
also occasionally been included.
Commonwealth of Independent States Free association of sov-
ereign states formed in 1991, comprising Russia and 11 other republics
that were formerly part of the Soviet Union. Members are Russia,
Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Moldova. Its administra-
tive center is in Minsk, Belarus. The Commonwealth’s functions are to
coordinate its members’ policies regarding their economies, foreign rela-
tions, defense, immigration policies, environmental protection, and law
enforcement.
commune
gious principles; monastic life is essentially communal (see MONASTICISM).
B. F. SKINNER’s Walden Two (1948) inspired many American attempts at
communal living, especially in the late 1960s and early 1970s. See also
COLLECTIVE FARM, COMMUNITARIANISM, KIBBUTZ, MOSHAV.
commune
commutative law Two closely related laws of number operations. In
symbols, they are stated: a + b = b + a and ab = ba. Stated in words:
Quantities to be added or multiplied can be combined in any order. More
generally, if two procedures give the same result when carried out in arbi-
trary order, they are commutative. Exceptions occur (e.g., in vector mul-
tiplication). See also ASSOCIATIVE LAW, DISTRIBUTIVE LAW.
Commynes
THEOR Y).
complex variable In mathematics, a VARIABLE that can take on the value
of a COMPLEX NUMBER. In basic algebra, the variables x and y generally stand
for values of real numbers. The algebra of complex numbers (complex
analysis) uses the complex variable z to represent a number of the form
a + bi. The modulus of z is its ABSOLUTE VALUE. A complex variable may be
graphed as a VECTOR from the origin to the point (a,b) in a rectangular
COORDINATE SYSTEM, its modulus corresponding to the vector’s length. Called
an Argand diagram, this representation establishes a connection between
complex analysis and vector analysis. See also EULER’S FORMULA.
composite family Family Compositae, one of the largest plant fami-
lies (also known as Asteraceae, DAISY family, and ASTER family), which con-
tains more than 1,100 genera and almost 20,000 species of herbaceous
plants, shrubs, and trees, found throughout the world. Though diverse in
habit and habitat, composites tend to grow in sunlit places in temperate
and subtropical regions. The family includes many garden ornamentals,
including AGERATUMs, asters, CHR YSANTHEMUMs, COSMOS, DAHLIAs, MARIGOLDs,
and ZINNIAs. Some genera include weeds such as DANDELION, RAGWEED, and
THISTLE. ARTEMISIA, ARTICHOKE, ENDIVE, SAFFLOWER, SALSIFY, LETTUCE, and SUNFLOWER
chologists. See also DYSLEXIA; LATERALITY; PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING; SPEECH.
power and CONTROL SYSTEMS (see PNEUMATIC DEVICE).
Compromise of 1867 or Ausgleich
Compton effect Change in WAVELENGTH of X RAYS and other energetic
forms of ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION when they collide with ELECTRONS. It is
a principal way in which radiant energy is absorbed by matter, and is
caused by the transfer of energy from PHOTONS to electrons. When pho-
tons collide with electrons that are free or loosely bound in atoms, they
transfer some of their energy and momentum to the electrons, which then
recoil. New photons of less energy and momentum, and hence longer
wavelength, are produced; these scatter at various angles, depending on
the amount of energy lost to the recoiling electrons. The effect demon-
strates the nature of the photon as a true particle with both energy and
momentum. Its discovery in 1922 by ARTHUR COMPTON was essential to
establishing the WAVE-PARTICLE DUALITY of ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION.
computed axial tomography
444 I
computer-integrated manufacturing (cid:2) computer science
A typical personal computer system consists of the computer itself, a video monitor, a keyboard, a mouse, and speakers. Other peripheral devices may include a printer,
scanner, camera, microphone, or external storage device. Chips and circuit boards (“cards”) are plugged into the motherboard. Other components, such as disk drives,
are housed in the computer case and controlled by a card called a controller. The microprocessor directs the computer’s activity via the motherboard and processes data
with its millions of transistors. Data and programs in use are stored in the RAM chips. The floppy and hard drives store data not in immediate use on magnetic disks. Opti-
cal disks, such as CD-ROMs and DVDs, may store data as well. Some circuit boards are dedicated to specific functions; the sound card, for example, generates sounds and
music. Additional boards, such as a modem, may be added by inserting them into an expansion slot, a row of electrical connectors into which the board is plugged. The
mouse is an input device used to position a pointer on the computer’s screen. On-screen selections are made by “clicking” one of the mouse’s buttons, sending a signal to
the computer.
© ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
cal systems. See also COMPUTER ANIMATION; COMPUTER ART.
computer-integrated manufacturing Data-driven AUTOMATION
by computers before the system is built in an attempt to eliminate wast-
age. See also ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, EXPERT SYSTEMS, ROBOTICS.
computer network See computer NETWORK
computer printer See computer PRINTER
computer program See computer PROGRAM
computer science Study of computers, their design (see COMPUTER
ARCHITECTURE), and their uses for computation, DATA PROCESSING, and systems
control, including design and development of computer HARDWARE and
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
OGNITION.
computing, quantum See QUANTUM COMPUTING
Comstock, Anthony (b. March 7, 1844, New Canaan, Conn.,
U.S.—d. Sept. 21, 1915, New York, N.Y.) U.S. social reformer. He was
an early agitator against abortion and pornography, lobbying successfully
for the enactment (1873) of a severe federal statute outlawing the trans-
portation of obscene matter in the mails (the Comstock Law). In that same
year, he founded the Society for the Suppression of Vice, which he
directed until his death. As a special agent of the U.S. Post Office (1873–
1915), he conducted spectacular raids on publishers and vendors. His
books include Traps for the Young (1883) and Morals Versus Art (1888).
Comte
those of AIX-LA-CHAPELLE, TROPPAU, LAIBACH, and VERONA.
concerto
and increase strength. See also PRECAST CONCRETE, PRESTRESSED CONCRETE, REIN-
FORCED CONCRETE.
concubinage
including FELIX MENDELSSOHN, HECTOR BERLIOZ, and RICHARD WAGNER, were
composers themselves. By the end of the 19th century, conducting had
become a specialty and the great conductors had become celebrities in
their own right.
conduction See THERMAL CONDUCTION
cone or strobilus
CHOS©N DYNASTY and in Japan during the TOKUGAWA PERIOD.
Confucius Chinese Kongfuzi or K’ung-fu-tzu
Congo, Republic of the known as Congo (Brazzaville) formerly
Middle Congo Republic, west-central Africa. Area: 132,047 sq mi
(342,000 sq km). Population (2005 est.): 3,602,000. Capital: BRAZZAVILLE.
Congo River or Zaire
Conkling, Roscoe (b. Oct. 30, 1829, Albany, N.Y., U.S.—d. April 18,
1888, New York, N.Y.) U.S. politician. He was a lawyer, orator, and leader
of the WHIG PARTY. He served in the U.S. House of Representatives (1859–
65) and Senate (1867–81). As a leader of the RADICAL REPUBLICANs, he sup-
ported severe RECONSTRUCTION measures. Resisting efforts by Pres.
RUTHERFORD B. HAYES to achieve civil service reform, he retained control of
New York state’s patronage system. At the 1880 Republican convention,
he led the Stalwart faction in supporting former Pres. ULYSSES S. GRANT.
In 1881 he resigned from the Senate in a patronage dispute with Pres.
JAMES GARFIELD.
Connacht or Connaught
MANNERS with his brilliant comic dialogue, satirical portrayal of fashion-
able society, uproarious bawdiness, and ironic scrutiny of the affectations
of his age. See also RESTORATION LITERATURE.
ERING PLANT).
Connolly, Maureen (Catherine) (b. Sept. 17, 1934, San Diego,
Connor, Ralph orig. Charles William Gordon (b. Sept. 13, 1860,
Indian Lands, Glengarry county, Ont., Can.—d. Oct. 31, 1937, Winnipeg,
Man.) Canadian novelist. Ordained a Presbyterian minister in 1890, Con-
nor became a missionary to mining and lumber camps in the Canadian
Rocky Mountains; this experience and memories of his childhood in Glen-
garry, Ont., provided material for his novels, including The Sky Pilot
(1899) and The Prospector (1904), which, combining adventure with reli-
gious messages and wholesome sentiment, made him the best-selling
Canadian novelist of the early 20th century. His best books are considered
to be The Man from Glengarry (1901) and Glengarry School Days (1902).
Connors, Jimmy in full James Scott Connors (b. Sept. 2, 1952,
conodont
Conservative Party (Canada) See PROGRESSIVE CONSERVATIVE PARTY
OF CANADA
Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers
sory military service by all able-bodied men between certain ages, though
a few countries—notably Israel—have also drafted women.) In the 19th
century Prussia’s system of building up a large standing army through
conscription became the model for competing European powers. During
the American Civil War both the federal government and the Confederacy
instituted a draft, but the U.S. did not use it again until entering World
War I in 1917. Like the U.S., Britain abandoned conscription at the end
of World War I but reverted to it when World War II threatened. During
the ensuing Cold War, Britain retained the draft until 1960 and the U.S.
until 1973. See also U.S. ARMY.
consequentialism In ETHICS, the doctrine that actions should be judged
right or wrong on the basis of their consequences. The simplest form of
consequentialism is classical (or hedonistic) UTILITARIANISM, which asserts
that an action is right or wrong according to whether it maximizes the net
balance of pleasure over pain in the universe. The consequentialism of
G.E. MOORE, known as “ideal utilitarianism,” recognizes beauty and
friendship, as well as pleasure, as intrinsic goods that one’s actions should
aim to maximize. According to the “preference utilitarianism” of R.M.
Hare (1919–2002), actions are right if they maximize the satisfaction of
preferences or desires, no matter what the preferences may be for. Con-
sequentialists also differ over whether each individual action should be
judged on the basis ofits consequences or whether instead general rules
of conduct should be judged in this way and individual actions judged
only by whether they accord with a general rule. The former group are
known as “act-utilitarians” and the latter as “rule-utilitarians.” See also
DEONTOLOGICAL ETHICS.
conservation law or law of conservation In physics, the prin-
PARTY, the German CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATIC UNION, the U.S. REPUBLICAN PARTY,
and the Japanese LIBERAL-DEMOCRATIC PARTY. See also CHRISTIAN DEMOCRACY;
LIBERALISM.
Conservative Judaism Form of Judaism that mediates between
REFORM JUDAISM and ORTHODOX JUDAISM. Founded in 19th-century Germany
as the Historical School, it arose among German-Jewish theologians who
advocated change but found Reform positions extreme. They accepted the
Reform emphasis on critical scholarship, but wished to maintain a stricter
observance of Jewish law (e.g., dietary laws) and continued belief in the
coming of the MESSIAH. In 1886, rabbis of this centrist persuasion founded
the Jewish Theological Seminary of America (New York), leading to the
development of Conservative Judaism as a religious movement.
Constance (b. 1154—d. Nov. 27, 1198, Palermo) Queen of Sicily
(1194–98) and Holy Roman empress-consort (1191–97). The daughter of
King ROGER II of Sicily, she married the future emperor HENR Y VI in 1186
and was later crowned with him in Rome. Her marriage gave the HOHEN-
STAUFEN DYNASTY a claim to the Sicilian throne, which she asserted against
the opposition of her nephew TANCRED. When Henry died (1197), she
secured the protection of Pope INNOCENT III and had her son FREDERICK II
crowned king in 1198.
Constance, Council of (1414–18) 16th ecumenical council of the
Roman Catholic church. It was convened at the request of Emperor
SIGISMUND to deal with three competing popes, examine the writings of
JAN HUS and JOHN WYCLIFFE, and reform the Church. National political
rivalries divided the Council of Constance. Two of the three contending
popes were deposed; the third abdicated, and in 1417 the council selected
a new pope, Martin V. The Council condemned propositions of Hus and
Wycliffe, and Hus was burned at the stake by secular authorities.
Constance, Lake German Bodensee
Constantine V Copronymus
456 I
Constitution of 1795 (cid:2) consumer credit
Constitution of 1795 (Year III) French constitution established dur-
ing the THERMIDORIAN REACTION in the FRENCH REVOLUTION. Known as the Con-
Constitution of the Third Republic See CONSTITUTIONAL LAWS OF
Constitution of the United States Fundamental law of the U.S.
See also CIVIL LIBERTY; COMMERCE CLAUSE; EQUAL RIGHTS AMENDMENT; ESTABLISHMENT
CLAUSE; FREEDOM OF SPEECH; JUDICIAR Y; STATES’ RIGHTS.
Constitution of the Year VIII (1799) French constitution established
after the Coup of 18–19 BRUMAIRE during the FRENCH REVOLUTION. Drafted by
EMMANUEL JOSEPH SIEYES, it disguised the true character of the military dic-
tatorship created by NAPOLEON, reassuring the partisans of the Revolution
by proclaiming the irrevocability of the sale of national property and by
upholding the legislation against the ÉMIGRÉ NOBILITY. It created the regime
known as the CONSULATE, which concentrated all real power in the hands
of Napoleon. Submitted to a plebiscite, it won overwhelmingly in 1800.
Constitutional Act or Canada Bill (1791) British law repealing
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Constitutional Democratic Party or Kadet Russian political
DUCER GOODS.
CONSUMERISM, RALPH NADER.
consumer goods (cid:2) Continental Congress
Economists use statistical information on income and purchases to trace
trends in consumption, seeking to map consumer demand for goods and
services. In CLASSICAL ECONOMICS, consumers are assumed to be rational and
to allocate expenditures in such a way as to maximize total satisfaction
from all purchases. Incomes and PRICEs are seen as consumption’s two
major determinants. Critics of the model point out that there are many
exceptions to rational consumer behaviour—for example, the phenom-
enon of conspicuous consumption, in which the high price of a product
increases its prestige and adds to demand.
consumption See TUBERCULOSIS
consumption tax Levy such as an excise tax, a SALES TAX, or a TARIFF
paid directly or indirectly by the consumer. Consumption taxes fall more
heavily on lower-income than on upper-income groups because people
with less money consume a larger proportion of their income than those
with more money. See also PROGRESSIVE TAX, REGRESSIVE TAX.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
458 I
Continental Divide (cid:2) continuity principle
The theory of continental drift is based on the concept that the continental and oce-
anic crusts are embedded in the uppermost layer of the rocky lithosphere. The lithos-
phere is divided into sections called tectonic plates, which slide over an underlying
partly molten layer of rock called the asthenosphere. New lithosphere is created at
diverging plate margins (e.g., midocean ridges), and old lithosphere is consumed at
converging margins (e.g., subduction zones). The continents passively “drift” along
with the moving plates, and over hundreds of millions of years this movement alters
the entire geography of the Earth.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
Continental philosophy Collective term for the many distinct
philospohical traditions, methods, and styles that predominated on the
European continent (particularly in France and Germany) from the time
of IMMANUEL KANT. It is usually understood in contrast with ANALYTIC PHILOSO-
PHY, also called Anglo-American philosophy. In the 20th century it encom-
passed schools such as PHENOMENOLOGY, EXISTENTIALISM, structuralism, and
DECONSTRUCTION and thinkers such as MARTIN HEIDEGGER, JEAN-PAUL SARTRE,
MAURICE MERLEAU-PONTY, MICHEL FOUCAULT, and JACQUES DERRIDA. See also
STRUCTURALISM; POSTSTRUCTURALISM.
continental shelf Broad, relatively shallow submarine platform that
forms a border to a continent, typically extending from the coast to depths
of 330–660 ft (100–200 m). Continental shelves average about 40 mi (65
km) in width. Almost everywhere they are simply a continuation of the
continental landmass: narrow, rough, and steep off mountainous coasts
but broad and comparatively level offshore from plains. Continental
shelves are usually covered with a layer of sand, silts, and silty muds.
Their surfaces feature small hills and ridges that alternate with shallow
depressions and valley-like troughs. In a few cases, steep-walled V-shaped
submarine canyons cut deeply into both the shelf and the slope below.
See illustration above.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
The broad, gentle pitch of the continental shelf gives way to the relatively steep con-
tinental slope. The more gradual transition to the abyssal plain is a sediment-filled
region called the continental rise. The continental shelf, slope, and rise are collec-
tively called the continental margin. Depth is exaggerated here for effect.
© ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
continental shield Any of the large stable areas of low relief (little
variation in elevations) in the Earth’s CRUST that are composed of PRECAM-
BRIAN crystalline rocks. These rocks are always more than 570 million
years old, and some are as old as 2–3 billion years. Continental shields
occur on each of the continents.
continental slope Seaward border of a CONTINENTAL SHELF. The world’s
combined continental slope is about 200,000 mi (300,000 km) long and
descends at an average angle of about 4° from the edge of the continen-
tal shelf to the beginning of the ocean basins at depths of 330–10,500 ft
(100–3,200 m). The slope is most gradual off stable coasts without major
rivers and is steepest off coasts with young mountain ranges and narrow
continental shelves. Slopes off mountainous coastlines and narrow shelves
commonly have outcrops of rock. The dominant sediments of continen-
tal slopes are muds; there are smaller amounts of sediments of sand or
gravel.
Continental System In the NAPOLEONIC WARS, the blockade designed
by NAPOLEON to paralyze Britain through the destruction of British com-
merce. In the Decrees of Berlin (1806) and MILAN (1807), France pro-
claimed that neutrals and French allies were not to trade with the British.
The United Kingdom responded with a counterblockade, which led indi-
rectly to the WAR OF 1812. Because of Britain’s naval superiority, the
effort to enforce the system proved disastrous for Napoleon.
continuing education or adult education Any form of learning
continuity principle or continuity equation Principle of FLUID
Contreras
SOMOZA FAMILY). The U.S. CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY played a key role in
included a high incidence of PELVIC INFLAMMATOR Y DISEASE, ECTOPIC PREGNANCY,
contralto See ALTO
460 I
conveyor belt (cid:2) Coolidge
of the uterus.) Disorders with symptoms similar to those of conversion
disorder include factitious disorder, DISSOCIATIVE IDENTITY DISORDER, and PER-
SONALITY DISORDER (histrionic type).
conveyor belt One of various devices that provide mechanized move-
ment of material, as in a FACTOR Y. Conveyor belts are used in industrial
applications and also on large farms, in warehousing and freight-handling,
and in movement of raw materials. Belt conveyors of fabric, rubber, plas-
tic, leather, or metal are driven by a power-operated roll mounted under-
neath or at one end of the conveyor. The belt forms a continuous loop and
is supported either on rollers (for heavy loads) or on a metal slider pan
(if loads are light enough to prevent frictional drag on the belt). Motors
operating through constant- or variable-speed reduction gears usually pro-
vide the power.
convolvulus See BINDWEED
Cook, Mt. See MOUNT COOK NATIONAL PARK
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
tion by calling out the state guard
during the BOSTON POLICE STRIKE in
ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
Calvin Coolidge.
CONDITIONING, HEAT EXCHANGER.
Coomassie See KUMASI
coon cat See MAINE COON CAT
Cooper, Alfred Duff, 1st Viscount Norwich of Aldwick (b.
Cooper, Gary orig. Frank James Cooper (b. May 7, 1901, Hel-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Coolidge (cid:2) coordinate system I
Co-operative Commonwealth Federation Political party
prominent in western Canada in the 1930s and ’40s. It was founded in
Calgary, Alta., in 1932 by a federation of farm, labour, and socialist par-
ties to transform the capitalist system into a “cooperative commonwealth”
by democratic means. It called for the socialization of banks and public
ownership of transportation, communication, and natural resources. It
won the general election in Saskatchewan in 1944 and took over the pro-
vincial government. It won further Saskatchewan elections but declined
elsewhere. In 1961 it merged with the NEW DEMOCRATIC PARTY.
coordinate geometry See ANALYTIC GEOMETR Y
coordinate system Arrangement of reference lines or curves used to
identify the location of points in space. In two dimensions, the most com-
mon system is the Cartesian (after RENÉ DESCARTES) system. Points are des-
ignated by their distance along a horizontal (x) and vertical (y) axis from
a reference point, the origin, designated (0, 0). Cartesian coordinates also
can be used for three (or more) dimensions. A polar coordinate system
locates a point by its direction relative to a reference direction and its
distance from a given point, also the origin. Such a system is used in radar
or sonar tracking and is the basis of bearing-and-range navigation sys-
tems. In three dimensions, it leads to cylindrical and spherical coordinates.
coordinate system, spherical See SPHERICAL COORDINATE SYSTEM
print until he was on his deathbed. By attributing to Earth a daily rota-
tion around its own axis and a yearly revolution around a stationary Sun,
he developed an idea that had far-reaching implications for the rise of
modern science. He asserted, in contrast to Platonic instrumentalism, that
astronomy must describe the real, physical system of the world. Only with
JOHANNES KEPLER was Copernicus’s model fully transformed into a new
philosophy about the fundamental structure of the universe.
copier See PHOTOCOPIER
Copland
ters such as an idea, process, or system. Protection in the U.S. now extends
for the life of the creator plus 70 years after his or her death. Works made
for hire are now protected for a maximum of 95 years from the date of
publication or 120 years from the date of the creation of the work. In
1988 the U.S. joined the BERN CONVENTION, an agreement that governs
international copyright. The Digital Millennium Copyright Act, adopted
in the U.S. in 1998, expanded owners’ control over digital forms of their
creations and penalized persons who sought to evade technological shields
(such as encryption) for copyrighted material. See also INTELLECTUAL PROP-
ERTY; PATENT; TRADEMARK.
coquina
Cordobés
cormorant
cornflower See BACHELOR’S BUTTON
Cornplanter or John O’Bail (b. c. 1732, New York?—d. Feb. 18,
1836, Warren county, Pa., U.S.) American Indian leader. Born to a white
trader and a Seneca mother, he fought alongside the British in the Ameri-
can Revolution, leading attacks on white settlements in western New York
and Pennsylvania. He later helped negotiate treaties that ceded large tracts
of Indian land to the U.S. He earned the enmity of his tribe after advo-
cating Indian nonresistance to white expansion and accepting a land grant
from Pennsylvania.
Cornwall Administrative (pop., 2001: 501,267, including the Isles of
SCILLY) and historic county, southwestern England. Located on a peninsula
jutting into the Atlantic Ocean and terminating in LAND’S END, it is the most
remote of English counties; its county seat is TRURO. Southern Cornwall
is a popular tourist area; much of the coast is now protected by the
National Trust. Tin, mined in Cornwall for at least 3,000 years, attracted
prehistoric settlers, and there are stone relics in the area. Since 1337 the
manors of Cornwall have belonged to the English sovereign’s eldest son,
who acts as duke of Cornwall.
Cornwallis, Charles Cornwallis, 1st Marquess and 2nd
Earl (b. Dec. 31, 1738, London,
Eng.—d. Oct. 5, 1805, Ghazipur,
India) British soldier and statesman.
In 1780, during the AMERICAN REVOLU-
TION, he was appointed British com-
mander in the American South. He
defeated HORATIO GATES at Camden,
S.C., then marched into Virginia and
encamped at Yorktown (see Siege of
YORKTOWN). Trapped and besieged
there, he was forced to surrender his
army (1781), a defeat that effectively
ended military operations in the war.
Despite his defeat, he
retained
esteem in England. As governor-
general of India (1786–93, 1805), he
introduced legal and administrative
reforms; the Cornwallis Code (1793)
established a tradition of incorrupt-
ible British civil servants. In the third
Mysore War he defeated Tippu Sul-
tan in 1792. As viceroy of Ireland
(1798–1801), he supported the parliamentary union of Britain and Ireland.
He negotiated the Anglo-French TREATY OF AMIENS in 1802. Reappointed
governor-general of India in 1805, he died shortly after his arrival there.
corona
BUSINESS FINANCE.
taxes. See also CAPITAL GAINS TAX; INCOME TAX.
MULTINATIONAL CORPORATION.
Corporation for Public Broadcasting See PBS
Correggio
Corsica
Cosimo, Piero di See PIERO DI COSIMO
Cosimo the Elder See Cosimo de’ MEDICI
cosine See TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTION
Cosmati
America. Area: 19,730 sq mi (51,100 sq km). Population (2005 est.):
4,221,000. Capital: SAN JOSÉ. Most of the people are of Spanish ancestry
Costa-Gavras
Cotonou
count or earl European title of nobility, ranking in modern times
directly below a MARQUESS or (in countries without marquesses) a DUKE. In
England the title of earl is the equivalent of count and ranks above a VIS-
COUNT. The wife of a count or earl is a countess. The Roman comes
(“count”) was originally a household companion of the emperor; under
the Franks he was a local commander and judge. The counts were later
incorporated into the feudal structure, some becoming subordinate to
dukes, though a few countships were as great as duchies. As royal author-
ity was reasserted over the feudatories, which took place at different times
in the different kingdoms, the counts lost their political authority, though
they retained their privileges as members of the nobility.
Counter-Reformation or Catholic Reformation In ROMAN
NERI, JOHN OF THE CROSS, TERESA OF ÁVILA, FRANCIS DE SALES, and VINCENT DE
country dance or contredanse
courante
Cousteau
BEANS.
Cowper
through the continental U.S. and Mexico to Central America. It weighs
about 20–50 lbs (9–23 kg) and is about 3–4 ft (1–1.3 m) long, including
its 12–16-in. (30–40-cm) tail. Its coarse fur is generally buff above and
whitish below; its legs are reddish, and its tail is bushy and black-tipped.
The coyote feeds mainly on small mammals such as rodents, rabbits, and
hares but can also take down deer, sometimes doing so in packs. Vegeta-
tion and carrion are commonly eaten as well. Though persecuted by
humans because of its potential (generally overstated) to prey on domes-
tic or game animals, it has adapted well to human-dominated environ-
ments, including urban areas. A coyote-dog cross is called a coydog.
coypu See NUTRIA
Coysevox
Cranach
crannog
(see BATTERSEA ENAMELWARE) were com-
patible with his cream-glazed prod-
ucts. By 1790 many other factories
(e.g., Liverpool, Bristol, Stafford-
shire) were producing creamware
with success; continental imitations
were generally inferior. Creamware
was continually made throughout the
19th century and later.
creation myth or cosmogony
the material, and the DEFORMATION over a period of time (creep strain) under
constant load is measured, usually with an extensometer or STRAIN GAUGE.
Time to failure is also measured against stress. Once creep strain versus
time is plotted, various mathematical techniques are available for extrapo-
lating creep behaviour beyond the test times; thus, designers can use
thousand-hour test data, for example, to predict ten-thousand-hour behav-
iour. See also TESTING MACHINE.
creosote
creditor See DEBTOR AND CREDITOR
include the THIRTEEN PRINCIPLES OF FAITH. In CHRISTIANITY the NICENE CREED was
Creston, Paul orig. Giuseppe Guttoveggio (b. Oct. 10, 1906,
New York, N.Y., U.S.—d. Aug. 24, 1985, San Diego, Calif.) U.S. com-
poser. Born to a poor immigrant family, he was largely self-taught in
music. His numerous works, many of which achieved wide performance,
are highly rhythmical and tonally accessible. They include six sympho-
nies, a Requiem and three masses, and several concertos. He is noted for
the rhythmic vitality and full harmonies of his music, which is marked
by modern dissonances and polyrhythms.
Cretaceous
Crispi
Croce
throw the government. It subsequently lost prestige and was dissolved by
the Popular Front government in 1936.
Cro-Magnon
cordage and textiles (e.g., cotton, hemp); oil crops, for consumption or
industrial uses (e.g., cottonseed, corn); ornamental crops, for landscape
gardening (e.g., dogwood, azalea); and industrial and secondary crops,
for various personal and industrial uses (e.g., rubber, tobacco).
crop duster Usually, an aircraft used for dusting or spraying large
acreages with PESTICIDES, though other types of dusters are also employed.
Aerial spraying and dusting permit prompt coverage of large areas at the
moment when application of pesticide is most effective and avoid the need
for wheeled vehicles that might damage crops. The technique was greatly
improved in the 1960s with the development of ultra-low-volume appli-
cators, in which concentrated pesticides are distributed in extremely small
amounts. See also SPRAYING AND DUSTING.
croquet
croton
crustacean
Cruise, Tom orig. Thomas
Cruise Mapother IV (b. July 3,
Crusade, Children’s See CHILDREN’S CRUSADE
Crusade, Stedinger See STEDINGER CRUSADE
cryogenics
Ctesibius
but by Nature.” See also INTUITIONISM; VOLUNTARISM.
Cuéllar, Javier Pérez de See Javier PEREZ DE CUELLAR
Cuernavaca
Cumae
Cultivation System or Culture System Revenue system in the
ety. See also CULTURE CONTACT; SOCIOCULTURAL EVOLUTION.
culture, pure See PURE CULTURE
Cumbria alternated between Scottish and English rule until it was taken
by the English in 1157. Lead, silver, and iron ore have been mined in the
district since the 12th century.
cumin
Curaçao
496 I
curling (cid:2) Curtis Institute of Music
curling Game in which two teams of four players each slide a round
stone by means of a gooseneck handle on the top over a 138-ft (42-m)
stretch of ice toward a target circle. The object is to deliver the stone clos-
est to the centre (called the house). Each player delivers two stones, which
average 40 lbs (18.1 kg) apiece, often applying a curl to the stone’s tra-
jectory. The player’s teammates use a broom to sweep the ice ahead of
the oncoming stone in order to facilitate a longer slide or to adjust the arc
of the curl. Blocking and knocking out an opponent’s stones are impor-
tant strategies of the sport. Curling originated in Scotland in the early 16th
century. World championships have been held since 1959 and are usually
dominated by Canadians and Scandinavians. In 1998 curling became a
medal sport in the Winter Olympic Games.
The British women’s curling team competing in the final match at the 2002 Winter
Olympics in Salt Lake City, Utah.
ROBERTO SCHMIDT—AFP/GETTY IMAGES
WALTER CHANDOHA
Currant (Ribes)
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Currier and Ives partnership of Nathaniel Currier and James
Curtis, Cyrus (Herman Kotzschmar) (b. June 18, 1850, Portland,
wife of the editor EDWARD BOK, and named for her father, the inventor
CHARLES GORDON CURTIS. Her endowment was adequate to assure scholar-
ships for gifted students throughout the world. Many eminent musicians
have served on its faculty, including WANDA LANDOWSKA, BOHUSLAV MAR-
TIN,, and RUDOLF SERKIN. Graduates include SAMUEL BARBER, LEONARD BERNSTEIN,
and GIAN CARLO MENOTTI.
Curtiz
also CULTURE; FOLKLORE; MYTH; TABOO.
customs duty See TARIFF
customs union Trade agreement by which a group of countries charges
a common set of TARIFFs to the rest of the world while allowing free trade
among themselves. It is a partial form of economic integration, interme-
diate between free-trade zones, which allow mutual FREE TRADE but lack a
common tariff system, and common markets, which both utilize common
tariffs and allow free movement of resources including capital and labour
between members. Well-known customs unions include the Zollverein, a
19th-century organization formed by several German states under Prus-
sian leadership, and the EUROPEAN UNION, which passed through a customs-
union stage on the path to fuller economic integration. See also European
Community; GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE; NORTH AMERICAN FREE
TRADE AGREEMENT; WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION.
Custoza
atmosphere. The Italianate style favoured in Utrecht, one of Holland’s
artistic centres, is evident in his work. Many of his surviving paintings
are signed but few are dated.
Cuyuni
there were three Cyclopes (Arges, Brontes, and Steropes) who forged
thunderbolts for ZEUS. In a later tradition, they were assistants to HEPHAES-
TUS in this task. Apollo destroyed them after one of their thunderbolts
killed ASCLEPIUS.
cyclotron
Cypselus
Moravian Corridor, separates the Bohemian Massif from the CARPATHIAN
MOUNTAINS. Woodlands are a characteristic feature of the Czech landscape;
most regions have a moderate oceanic climate. The economy has been
privatized since the collapse of communism and is now largely market-
oriented. The Czech Republic is a multiparty republic with two legisla-
tive houses; its chief of state is the president, and the head of government
is the prime minister. Until 1918 its history was largely that of BOHEMIA.
In that year the independent republic of Czechoslovakia was born through
the union of Bohemia and MORAVIA with SLOVAKIA. Czechoslovakia came
under the domination of the Soviet Union after World War II, and from
1948 to 1989 it was ruled by a communist government. Its growing politi-
cal liberalization was suppressed by a Soviet invasion in 1968 (see PRA-
GUE SPRING). After communist rule collapsed in 1989–90, separatist
sentiments emerged among the Slovaks, and in 1992 the Czechs and Slo-
vaks agreed to break up their federated state. At midnight on Dec. 31,
1992, Czechoslovakia was peacefully dissolved and replaced by two new
countries, the Czech Republic and Slovakia, with the region of Moravia
remaining in the former. In 1999 the Czech Republic joined NATO, and
in 2004 it became a member of the European Union.
Czerny
tenths of
the population; Slovaks and
Moravians are the largest minorities. Lan-
guage: Czech (official). Religion: Chris-
tianity (predominantly Roman Catholic,
also other Christians, Protestant). Cur-
rency: koruna. The landlocked country is dominated by the Bohemian
Massif, a ring of mountains rising to 5,256 ft (1,602 m) at Mount Snezka
to encircle the Bohemian Plateau. The MORAVA RIVER valley, known as the
da Gama, Vasco See Vasco da GAMA
Da Ponte
Daidalic sculpture See DAEDALIC
SCULPTURE
Daigak Guksa
a modern communication and trans-
portation system and instituted social
reforms. He left India in 1856, but
his controversial policy of annex-
ation was considered a contributing
factor to the INDIAN MUTINY (1857).
Dalhousie University Privately
endowed university in Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada. It was founded in
1818 as Dalhousie College by the 9th
earl of Dalhousie,
then lieutenant
governor of Nova Scotia,
became a university in 1863. It is
organized into faculties of arts, sci-
ence, management,
architecture,
engineering, computer science, law,
medicine, dentistry, health profes-
sions, and graduate studies.
Dalton brothers U.S. outlaws.
Probably born in Cass Co., Mo., they
worked as cowboys in Oklahoma but
by 1889 had become horse thieves.
In 1890–91 they robbed gambling
houses, trains, and banks. In 1892
Bob, Grat, and Emmett Dalton and
two other gang members rode into
Coffeyville, Kan., to robits banks;
they were recognized, and vigilante
citizens killed all but Emmett, who
was wounded and sent to prison for
14 years. The fourth brother, Bill, had returned to Oklahoma before the
raid; he later formed his own gang, and was shot by lawmen in 1894 while
playing with his daughter.
Daly River
Dandolo
Danton
Dardanelles
criminal lawyer. He represented striking Pennsylvania coal miners, draw-
ing attention to working conditions and the use of CHILD LABOUR (1902–03);
secured the acquittal of WILLIAM HAYWOOD in the assassination of Gov.
Frank R. Steunenberg of Idaho (1907); and sought
to defend the
McNamara brothers, accused of bombing the Los Angeles Times building
(1911). He saved Richard Loeb and Nathan Leopold from a death sen-
tence for the murder of 14-year-old Robert Franks and won acquittal for
members of an African American family who had fought a mob trying to
expel them from their home in a white Detroit neighbourhood (1925–26).
Perhaps his most famous case was the SCOPES TRIAL (1925), in which he
defended a high school teacher who was charged with violating a Ten-
nessee state law against teaching Darwin’s theory of evolution.
darshan or darsan
database management system (DBMS) System for quick search
Date Line See INTERNATIONAL DATE LINE
also FISSION-TRACK DATING; HELIUM DATING; LEAD-210 DATING; RUBIDIUM-STRONTIUM
DATING; URANIUM-234–URANIUM-238 DATING; URANIUM-THORIUM-LEAD DATING.
Daubenton
NOLOGY; CABLE MODEM; DSL; ISDN; FAX; RADIO; TELETYPE; T1; WIRELESS COMMU-
NICATIONS.
story collection Monday Tales (1873), the play L’Arlésienne (1872), the
novels The Nabob (1877) and Sappho (1884), and several volumes of
memoirs. His son, Léon Daudet (1867–1942), edited with CHARLES MAU-
RRAS the reactionary review L’Action Française and was a virulent sati-
rist and polemicist on the subjects of medicine and psychology as well
as public affairs.
Daughters of the American Revolution (DAR) U.S. patriotic
society for direct descendants of soldiers or others who aided the cause of
independence. It was organized in 1890 and chartered by Congress in 1895.
Its historical division stresses the study of U.S. history and preservation of
Americana. Its educational division provides scholarships and loans, helps
support schools for underprivileged youth and for Americanization train-
ing, sponsors prizes, and publishes manuals. Its patriotic division publishes
the Daughters of the American Revolution Magazine and The National
Defense News. It was long known for its conservatism; its refusal in 1939
to let the black singer MARIAN ANDERSON perform at Washington’s Consti-
tution Hall led to her famous concert at the Lincoln Memorial.
Daumier
became the city’s leading painter after the death of HANS MEMLING. Most
of his works are altarpieces and other panels featuring traditional religious
themes, but his best-known paintings, The Judgment of Cambyses and The
Flaying of Sisamnes (1498), deal with the theme of justice; they origi-
nally hung in the town hall of Bruges. His works are among the earliest
Flemish paintings to feature the Italian Renaissance iconography of putti
(male child angels) and garlands.
David
Davos
SIBELIUS.
Commission and arranged the DAWES PLAN. He served as vice president
(1925–29) under CALVIN COOLIDGE. He shared the 1925 Nobel Prize for
Peace with Sir AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN.
Dawes General Allotment Act or Dawes Severalty Act
YOUNG PLAN.
dawn redwood Coniferous, nonevergreen tree (Metasequoia glyp-
tostroboides), the only living species of the genus Metasequoia, of the
family Taxodiaceae, native to remote valleys of central China. Both
branchlets and leaves grow out in pairs from points along the stem. The
bright green, feathery leaves turn reddish brown in autumn. Though
Metasequoia fossils are abundant, the tree was thought to be extinct until
living specimens were discovered in the 1940s. Only a few thousand are
known to have survived, in central China. Since these stands were dis-
covered, seeds and cuttings have been planted throughout the world.
Dawson, George Geoffrey orig. George Geoffrey Robin-
Daxue
Dayak
development. Though embittered, he was widely honoured as the father
of radio and the grandfather of television.
De Gasperi
he advocated and who favoured more violent tactics. He then created the
unsuccessful Workers’ International Industrial Union.
de Man
Debrecen
possible outcomes for each experiment, giving information about the state
of affairs preparatory to making a decision; a set of available acts depend-
ing on the experiments made and their consequences; and a set of pos-
sible consequences of the acts, in which each possible act assigns to each
possible initial state some particular consequence. The problem is dealt
with by assessing probabilities of consequences conditional on different
choices of experiments and acts and by assigning a utility function to the
set of consequences according to some scheme of value or preference of
the decision maker. An optimal solution consists of an optimal decision
function, which assigns to each possible experiment an optimal act that
maximizes the utility, or value, and a choice of an optimal experiment.
See also COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS, GAME THEOR Y.
Decius
deciduous tree Broad-leaved tree that sheds all its leaves during one
season. Deciduous forests are found in three middle-latitude regions with
a temperate climate characterized by a winter season and year-round pre-
cipitation: eastern North America, western Eurasia, and northeastern Asia.
They also extend into more arid regions along stream banks and around
bodies of water. OAKS, BEECHES, BIRCHES, CHESTNUTS, ASPENS, ELMS, MAPLES, and
gave up its North African colonies by 1962. Portugal gave up its African
colonies in the 1970s; Macau was returned to the Chinese in 1999.
decompression chamber See HYPERBARIC CHAMBER
decompression sickness also called the bends or caisson dis-
also POSTMODERNISM; POSTSTRUCTURALISM.
Decoration Day See MEMORIAL DAY
decorative arts Arts concerned with the design and decoration of
objects that are utilitarian rather than purely aesthetic, including CERAMICS,
glassware, BASKETR Y, JEWELR Y, METALWORK, FURNITURE, and TEXTILES. The separa-
FORMAL AND INFORMAL).
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
decompression chamber (cid:2) defamation
BOU, ELK, MULE DEER, MUNTJAC, RED DEER, ROE DEER, WHITE-TAILED DEER.
Rival European red deer stags (Cervus elaphus) fighting for possession of a hind in
the rutting season.
STEFAN MEYERS GDT/ARDEA LONDON
deer mouse or white-footed mouse Any of about 60 species
defecation
Deinarchus See DINARCHUS
Deinonychus
Delaunay
Deleuze
blue ground. Andrea (di Marco) Della Robbia (1435–1525), Luca’s
nephew, assumed control of the workshop c. 1470. Trained as a marble
sculptor, his best-known works are ten roundels of infants on the facade
of Florence’s Foundling Hospital (c. 1487). Giovanni Della Robbia
(1469–1529), the most distinguished of Andrea’s sons, took control of the
family workshop after his father’s death. His early works, notably a lavabo
in Santa Maria Novella (1497) and medallions in the Loggia of San Paolo
(1493–95), were collaborations with his father.
dell’Abbate, Niccolo See Niccolo dell’ABBATE
Delmarva Peninsula Peninsula, eastern U.S. Extending between
CHESAPEAKE and DELAWARE bays, it is about 180 mi (290 km) long and up
to 70 mi (110 km) wide. Encompassing parts of the states of Delaware,
Maryland, and Virginia—hence its name—it includes Maryland’s Eastern
Shore. Fishing and tourism are economically important to the area.
Delors
Democratic Republic of the Congo See Democratic Republic of
the CONGO
Democrats of the Left (DS) formerly (1921–91) Italian Commu-
nist Party (1991–98) Democratic Party of the Left Major Italian
political party. Founded as the Partito Comunista Italiano (PCI) in 1921
by dissidents of the ITALIAN SOCIALIST PARTY’s left wing, it was outlawed with
other political parties by BENITO MUSSOLINI’s fascist government in 1926
and went underground. It participated in the Italian Resistance in World
War II. After the war it joined in coalition governments and was consis-
tently successful at the polls. In 1956, after the crimes of JOSEPH STALIN
were revealed, PALMIRO TOGLIATTI tried to dissociate the PCI from the Soviet
Union. ENRICO BERLINGUER, as party leader from 1972 to 1984, became the
leading proponent of EUROCOMMUNISM. In order to consolidate left-wing
forces and broaden its base, the party changed its name to Democratic
Party of the Left in 1991; it became one of Italy’s largest political parties
and western Europe’s largest communist party. In 1998 it renamed itself
Democrats of the Left.
Democritus
demurrer
metre (kg/m3). The expression “particle density” refers to the number of
particles per unit volume, not to the density of a single particle. See also
SPECIFIC GRAVITY.
D’Entrecasteaux
“Do not bear false witness.” The most important exponent of deontolog-
ical ethics is IMMANUEL KANT. See also CATEGORICAL IMPERATIVE.
Depardieu
dermatitis or eczema
also used. All are energy-intensive and therefore expensive. Currently,
more than 2 billion gallons (8 million cu m) of fresh water are produced
each day by several thousand desalination plants throughout the world,
the largest plants being in the Arabian Peninsula.
Descartes
17th century, the name was often used for two quite distinct areas. Gaelic
Desmond extended over part of modern Counties Kerry and Cork; Anglo-
Norman Desmond extended over northern Kerry, most of the modern
county of Limerick, southwestern Tipperary, eastern and southern County
Cork, and eastern Waterford.
Desmoulins
deuterium oxide See HEAVY WATER
Deuteronomic Reform
nephew, Karl August Devrient (1797–1872), acted in Dresden, Karlsruhe,
and principally Hannover (1839–72), where he was popular in plays by
Shakespeare, Goethe, and Schiller. Karl’s brother Eduard (1801–77)
began his career as an opera singer, then worked as an actor and stage
director in Dresden (1844–52) and Karlsruhe (1852–70), where he
directed German classics and made new translations of Shakespeare’s
plays. Karl’s other brother, Emil (1803–72), made his stage debut in 1821
and acted with the Dresden court theatre (1831–68); his greatest successes
were as Hamlet and as Goethe’s Tasso. Eduard’s son Otto (1838–94) acted
in various companies, then became a director in Karlsruhe and other Ger-
man cities. In Weimar he produced his own version of Goethe’s Faust
(1876); he also wrote several tragedies. Karl’s son Max (1857–1929)
made his debut in Dresden in 1878 and in 1882 joined the famed Vienna
Burgtheater.
dew Deposit of water droplets formed at night by the condensation of
water vapour from the air onto the surfaces of exposed objects. Dew forms
on clear nights, when exposed surfaces lose heat by radiation and are thus
usually colder than the air. The cold surface cools the air in its vicinity,
and, if the air is humid enough, it may cool below its dew point, the tem-
perature at which water vapour condenses out of the air onto the surface.
See also FROST.
Dewar
the country’s leading industrial cen-
Its historic buildings include
temples, churches, and more than
700 mosques, some of which date to
the 15th century.
dialysis
Diderot
dicot See COTYLEDON, FLOWERING PLANT
Didyma
NUTRITION and are most effective combined with exercise. Appetite sup-
pressants may have dangerous side effects. Excessive weight loss may be
a sign of ANOREXIA NERVOSA.
Dietrich
See also ANALOG COMPUTER.
Digital Subscriber Line See DSL
digital-to-analog conversion (DAC) Process by which digital sig-
digital video disk See DVD
digitalis
Dilke
Dimitrov
Diocletian
Lucien Lelong. In 1947 he introduced his revolutionary “New Look,”
which featured small shoulders, a natural waistline, and a voluminous
skirt, a drastic change from the World War II look of padded shoulders
and short skirts. In the 1950s the “sack,” or “H” line, became the char-
acteristic silhouette of his designs. He was instrumental in commercial-
izing Parisian fashion on a worldwide scale.
diorite
recording. See also ACTOR-MANAGER SYSTEM; AUTEUR THEOR Y.
Directoire style
essary to chase intruders from a territory or for animals to injure each
other in competition for mates. One type of defensive display deceives
predators or lures them away from vulnerable young. See also BIRDSONG;
COURTSHIP BEHAVIOUR.
used for CONSUMPTION or SAVING.
Dispur
hands. From 17th-century England, the word distaff became a synonym
for maternal as most spinning was done by women in their homes. See
also DOMESTIC SYSTEM.
distribution See FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION, NORMAL DISTRIBUTION
the products. See also ASSOCIATIVE LAW; COMMUTATIVE LAW.
District Court, U.S. See UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
District of Columbia Federal district of the U.S. Coextensive with the
city of WASHINGTON, it is bounded by Maryland and Virginia. Originally
100 sq mi (259 sq km), the territory was authorized by Congress in 1790
and granted by Maryland and Virginia; it now occupies 68 sq mi (176 sq
km). The site was chosen by Pres. GEORGE WASHINGTON and became the
seat of the federal government by 1800. Part of the district (ALEXANDRIA,
Va.) was retroceded to Virginia in 1847. The slave trade was prohibited
in the District in 1850 and slavery was abolished in 1862. The territorial
government was abolished in 1874 in favour of government by a com-
mission appointed by the president. Residents were granted suffrage in
national elections in 1961 by the 23rd Amendment to the U.S. CONSTITU-
TION. The mayor-council form of government was established in 1967.
Originally appointees of the president, the mayor and councilors became
elected officials in 1973 and received local legislative powers in 1974.
dithyramb
AQUAVIT; BRANDY; GIN; LIQUEUR; RUM; VODKA; and WHISKEY.
divertimento
pioneers of jazz, although many critics of popular music believe the term
better describes the music of a later wave of white Chicago musicians
including Jimmy McPartland, Bud Freeman, and Frank Teschemacher.
The earliest jazz ensembles grew out of the RAGTIME and brass bands of
New Orleans, incorporating elements of the BLUES. In early jazz ensembles,
such as those led by KING OLIVER and JELLY ROLL MORTON, the trumpet or
cornet plays the melody, with clarinet and trombone providing accompa-
niment. The tension created by soloists contrasts with the release of
ensemble refrains. It is played with a distinctive two-beat rhythm, result-
ing in ajoyous cacophony at fast tempos or slow, mournful dirges. Dix-
ieland groups usually include banjo, tuba, and drums.
Dixon, Joseph (b. Jan. 18, 1799, Marblehead, Mass., U.S.—d. June
15, 1869, Jersey City, N.J.) U.S. inventor and manufacturer. Largely self-
taught, Dixon began his pioneering industrial use of GRAPHITE in 1827 with
the manufacture of lead pencils, stove polish, and lubricants. He discov-
ered that graphite crucibles withstood high temperatures, and he secured
patents on graphite crucibles for making steel and pottery. He established
a crucible steelworks in Jersey City in 1850. He also experimented with
photography and photolithography and devised a technique for printing
banknotes in colour to prevent counterfeiting.
Dixon, Willie orig. William James Dixon (b. July 1, 1915, Vicks-
Djakarta See JAKARTA
Djibouti
Dnieper River
Doctors Without Borders French Médecins Sans Frontières
Dog Star See SIRIUS
Dollar Diplomacy U.S. foreign
Dollfuss
Dombrowska, Maria See Maria D/BROWSKA
Dome of the Rock or Mosque of Omar Oldest existing Islamic
Domenichino
Dominica
tic service has declined in the U.S. and Europe since the early 1920s, a trend
attributed to the leveling of social classes, greater job opportunities for
women, and the spread of labour-saving household devices.
domestic system or putting-out system Production system wide-
RIK IBSEN. GERHART HAUPTMANN, EUGENE O’NEILL, and ARTHUR MILLER wrote
Domingo, Plácido (b. Jan. 21,
1941, Madrid, Spain) Spanish tenor
and conductor. He moved to Mexico
in 1949 with his parents, both of
whom were ZARZUELA (a form of Span-
ish light opera) singers. He studied
voice, piano, and conducting, mak-
ing his debut as a baritone. After
developing his tenor range, he made
his U.S. debut, spent three years in
Tel Aviv (singing in Hebrew), came
to the New York City Opera in 1965,
and debuted with the Metropolitan
Opera at Lewissohn Stadium in
1966. His resonant, powerful voice,
imposing physical
stature, good
looks, and dramatic ability made him
one of the most popular tenors of the
second half of the 20th century.
Dominic, Saint orig. Domingo
de Guzmán (b. 1170, Caleruega,
Castile—d. Aug. 6, 1221, Bologna,
Romagna; canonized July 3, 1234;
feast day August 8) Founder of the
Domitian
late 1940s. DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER, JOHN F. KENNEDY, and LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Portuguese power in the colony. Each donatário received a portion of land
and was charged with recruiting and protecting settlers and promoting
agriculture and commerce. At one time Brazil’s viability as a colony
depended on the success of the donatários, but by 1754 all the captain-
cies had been abolished.
Donatello
Dong Thap Muoi See Plain of REEDS
Dong Zhongshu
Garden (1916), Hymen (1921), and Red Roses for Bronze (1929). She was
also acclaimed for her translations, verse drama, and prose works.
Doolittle, Jimmy orig. James Harold Doolittle (b. Dec. 14, 1896,
Alameda, Calif., U.S.—d. Sept. 27, 1993, Pebble Beach, Calif.) U.S. gen-
eral. He enlisted in the army in World War I and became an aviator. After
the war he earned a Ph.D. in engineering and remained in the Army Air
Corps as a test pilot until 1930, when he became head of aviation for
Shell Oil Co. In 1932 he set a world air speed record. Returning to active
duty during World War II, he led a daring raid on Tokyo (1942), for which
he received the Congressional Medal of Honor. He commanded air opera-
tions on many fronts, including attacks on Germany in 1944–45. After the
war he remained active in the aerospace industry. He received the Presi-
dential Medal of Freedom in 1989.
door Movable barrier installed in the entry of a room or building to
restrict access or provide visual privacy. Early doors were hides or tex-
tiles. With monumental architecture came pivoting doors of rigid, perma-
nent materials; important chambers often had stone or bronze doors.
Pompeiian doors looked much like modern wooden doors; they were
constructed of stiles (vertical planks) and rails (horizontal planks) fastened
together to support panels and occasionally equipped with locks and
hinges. The typical Western medieval door was of vertical planks backed
with horizontal or diagonal bracing. In the 20th century, a single, hollow-
core panel door became most common. Other types include the revolv-
ing door, folding door, sliding door (inspired by the Japanese SHOJI), rolling
door, and Dutch door (divided horizontally so that the lower or upper part
can be opened separately).
Door Peninsula Peninsula, northeastern Wisconsin, U.S. Located
between GREEN BAY and Lake MICHIGAN, it was named for a strait atits tip
known as La Porte des Mortes (“Death’s Door”). About 80 mi (130 km)
long and 25 mi (40 km) wide at its base, the peninsula was visited in the
17th century by French traders and missionaries. It is now a year-round
vacation area, and tourism is a major business. The whole peninsula is
popularly known as Door County, though Door is but one of four coun-
ties on the peninsula.
dopamine
dormer Window set vertically in a structure that projects from a slop-
ing roof. It often illuminates a bedroom. In the late Gothic and early
Renaissance periods, elaborate masonry dormers were designed. Dormers
were used along with the mansard ROOF to defy a Parisian law limiting
buildings to six stories; the seventh story was called a garret (or attic) and
was made habitable by the dormer. See also GABLE.
dormouse Any of 20 RODENT species (family Gliridae) found through-
out Eurasia and northern Africa.
Dormice have large eyes, soft fur,
rounded ears, and a hairy (sometimes
bushy)
tail. They live in trees,
bushes, and rock walls and in nests
of plant material. They eat fruit, nuts,
birds’ eggs, and some insects and
small animals. Many species sleep
for long periods, particularly in win-
ter. The largest species, the edible
dormouse (Glis glis),
is gray and
attains a maximum length of about 8
in. (20 cm), excluding the 6-in. (15-
cm) tail.
Dornberger
of the ACCUSED; DUE PROCESS.
double refraction or birefringence Optical property in which a
single ray of unpolarized light (see POLARIZATION) splits into two compo-
nents traveling at different velocities and in different directions. One ray
is refracted (see REFRACTION) at an angle as it travels through the medium,
while the other passes through unchanged. The splitting occurs because
the speed of the ray through the medium is determined by the orientation
of the light compared with the CR YSTAL LATTICE of the medium. Since unpo-
larized light consists of waves that vibrate in all directions, some will pass
through the lattice without being affected, while others will be refracted
and change direction. Materials that exhibit double refraction include ICE,
QUARTZ, and SUGAR.
ALEXANDER CARTWRIGHT.
Doubs River
Douglas-Home
Down syndrome or trisomy
draft See BILL OF EXCHANGE
draft See CONSCRIPTION
LINE.
Drake equation or Green Bank equation Equation claimed to
Drakensberg
m) and extends from southwest to northeast in LESOTHO and southeastern
South Africa, separating the extensive high plateaus of the interior from
the lower lands along the coast. It is an area of many game reserves and
national parks.
Draper, Charles Stark (b. Oct. 2, 1901, Windsor, Mo., U.S.—d. July
25, 1987, Cambridge, Mass.) U.S. aeronautical engineer. He taught at MIT
from 1935, where he developed a gunsight for naval ANTI-AIRCRAFT GUNS
that was installed on most U.S. naval vessels in World War II. His iner-
tial guidance system, called spatial inertial reference equipment (SPIRE),
allowed planes, submarines, and ballistic missiles to travel thousands of
miles to their destinations without reference to outside navigational aids,
such as radio or the positions of celestial bodies. His group at the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology also developed guidance systems for
the APOLLO program. He is memorialized in the annual Charles Stark
Draper Prize for achievement in engineering.
Draper, Ruth (b. Dec. 2, 1884, New York, N.Y., U.S.—d. Dec. 30, 1956,
New York City) U.S. monologist. She began her career by writing dramatic
sketches about people she had observed and performing them at parties.
She made her New York debut (1917) in a series of one-act pieces. Her
London debut (1920) established her as a master monologist. She per-
formed worldwide, playing on a bare stage with few props and creating
characters and settings by subtle modulation of feature, gesture, and voice.
Drau River See DRAVA RIVER
Drava River
Dresden Codex Latin Codex Dresdensis One of the few pre-
dressage
up its errors in making the case. After a new court-martial (1899) again
found Dreyfus guilty, he was pardoned by the president of the republic in
an effort to resolve the issue. In 1906 a civilian court of appeals cleared
Dreyfus and reversed all previous convictions. Formally reinstated and
decorated with the Legion of Honor, he later saw active service in World
War I. The affair resulted in the separation of church and state in 1905.
Dreyfuss
drupe Fruit
MANGO, OLIVE, and WALNUT.
Drury Lane Theatre Oldest
English theatre still in use. It was
built in London by Thomas Killi-
grew for his acting company as the
Theatre Royal (1663). It burned in
1672 and was rebuilt in 1674 with
CHRISTOPHER WREN as architect. It prospered under such actor-managers as
COLLEY CIBBER and later under DAVID GARRICK and RICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN.
Drusus Germanicus
illegal drugs also have medical uses (see COCAINE; HEROIN; DRUG ADDICTION).
See also DRUG RESISTANCE; PHARMACOLOGY; PHARMACY.
drug addiction or chemical dependency Physical and/or psy-
addictions are to alcohol (see ALCOHOLISM), BARBITURATES, TRANQUILIZERS, and
drug poisoning or medicinal poisoning Harmful effects of
Dry Tortugas
(metaphysical dualism); also, any theory that employs dualisms.
Examples of epistemological dualisms are subject and object and sensa-
tion and sensibilia; examples of metaphysical dualisms are mind and mat-
ter, good and evil, and God and world. Dualism is distinguished from
MONISM and PLURALISM.
Dubayy or Dubai
duck hawk See PEREGRINE FALCON
ductus arteriosus
Dujardin
Dumfries
one roof, are a focal point in the modern city centre. Dundee was a world
centre for jute manufacturing in the 19th century. Textiles are still pro-
duced, but since World War II light engineering has become the predomi-
nant industry. The University of Dundee was founded in 1881.
dune See SAND DUNE
dung beetle Any member of one subfamily (Scarabaeinae) of SCARAB
BEETLES, which shapes manure into a ball (sometimes as large as an apple)
with its scooperlike head and paddle-shaped antennae. They vary from
0.2 to more than 1 in. (5–30 mm) long. In early summer it buries itself
and the ball and feeds on it. Later in the season the female deposits eggs
in dung balls, on which the larvae will later feed. They are usually round
with short wing covers (elytra) that expose the end of the abdomen. They
can eat more than their own weight in 24 hours and are considered help-
ful because they hasten the conversion of manure to substances usable by
other organisms.
Dungannon
DuPont Co. in full E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co. U.S. chemi-
Dupuytren
Durga-puja
Duryea
Duvalier
as the absorbent, and sodium nitrate was added as an oxidizing agent to
increase the strength of the explosive.
dysentery
E. coli
CHRISTUS, DIRCK BOUTS, HUGO VAN DER GOES, and HANS MEMLING.
588 I
Earth impact hazard (cid:2) East
1,000 Earth-crossing asteroids larger than 0.6 mi (1 km) may exist.
Impacts of 0.6-mi-size asteroids are believed to occur a few times every
million years. Such a collision would deliver the explosive force of sev-
eral HYDROGEN BOMBs, possibly resulting in global climate disturbances or
huge tidal waves. The impact of an object about 6 mi (10 km) in diam-
eter is thought to have caused a massive extinction of species, including
the DINOSAURs, at the end of the CRETACEOUS PERIOD.
Earth impact hazard The danger of collision with ASTEROIDS and COM-
ETS whose orbits carry them near EARTH. Space around Earth contains vast
numbers of objects in a range of sizes, but only the largest, which strike
very rarely on average, are thought to pose a great danger. Scientists
believe such an impact caused the mass EXTINCTION of DINOSAURS and other
species at the end of the CRETACEOUS PERIOD 65 million years ago. In addi-
tion to creating tremendous immediate destruction, a large impact could
throw great clouds of debris into the atmosphere, cutting off sunlight and
causing a prolonged temperature drop—an “impact winter” (similar to a
NUCLEAR WINTER) that would kill plant life and bring on worldwide famine.
The amount of damage depends primarily on the colliding object’s mass
and relative velocity. The energy released, expressed in millions of tons
(megatons) of TNT, falls between about 10 megatons and 1 billion mega-
tons, corresponding to objects roughly 160 ft (50 m) to 12 mi (20 km)
across. The last destructive impact known, the TUNGUSKA EVENT, occurred
over Siberia in 1908. Since the 1990s, search programs have scanned for
objects on possible collision courses. Should a collision appear likely,
nonexplosive projectiles or, in extreme cases, NUCLEAR WEAPONS might suc-
ceed in redirecting the object away from Earth.
ronment and Development Conference held in Rio de Janeiro
(June 3–14, 1992) to reconcile worldwide economic development with
environmental protection. It was the largest gathering of world leaders in
history, with 117 heads of state and representatives of 178 countries.
Biodiversity, GLOBAL WARMING, sustainable development, and preservation
of tropical rain forests were among the topics discussed. Five international
agreements were signed amid tensions between the industrialized coun-
tries of the North and the poorer developing states of the South, who were
reluctant to accept environmental restrictions without increased Northern
economic aid. Follow-up meetings were held in 1997 at the UN General
Assembly in New York and in 2002 in Johannesburg, S.Af. See also RIO
TREATY.
also CREAMWARE.
Lead-glazed earthenware water pot,
Paris, 15th century, in the National
Museum of Ceramics, Sèvres, France.
COURTESY OF THE MUSEE NATIONAL DE LA CERAMIQUE,
SEVRES
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Earthworm (Lumbricus terrestris).
Earthshine on the moon.
COURTESY OF YERKES OBSERVATORY, WISCONSIN
JOHN MARKHAM
REVOLUTION.
East Prussia German Ostpreussen
East African Rift System See GREAT RIFT VALLEY
LU XUN; MURASAKI SHIKIBU.
East China Sea See CHINA SEA
East India Co. or English East India Co. English CHARTERED COM-
PANY formed for trade with East and Southeast Asia and India, incorpo-
rated in 1600. It began as a monopolistic trading body, establishing early
trading stations at Surat, Madras (now CHENNAI), Bombay (MUMBAI), and
Calcutta (KOLKATA). Trade in spices was its original focus; this broadened
to include cotton, silk, and other goods. In 1708 it merged with a rival
found, as well as evidence of Roman occupation. The South Saxons came
to dominate the area, and they were in turn subjugated by WESSEX. In 1066
William of Normandy (see WILLIAM I) landed at Pevensey and fought the
Battle of HASTINGS. Along the coast, Hove, BRIGHTON, Peacehaven, Seaford,
Eastbourne, Bexhill, and Hastings form an ever-lengthening line of
resorts.
Country occupying the eastern half of the island of Timor, Southeast Asia.
Bounded by the Timor Sea and by the western half of TIMOR, it also
East-West Schism See SCHISM OF 1054
Easter Island Spanish Isla de Pascua native Rapa Nui
Ebbinghaus
land CREE, DELAWARE, FOX, HURON, Illinois, IROQUOIS, MOHICAN, MIAMI, MIC-
MAC, MOHAWK, MOHEGAN, MONTAGNAIS AND NASKAPI, OJIBWA, ONEIDA,
EB virus See EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS
useful when the required stroke of the reciprocating motion is small in
comparison with the dimensions of the driving shaft. Because an eccen-
tric can be attached anywhere along a shaft, it is unnecessary to form any
part of the shaft into a CRANK. Eccentrics are seldom used to transmit large
FORCES because FRICTION loss would be high; they are commonly used to
drive the valve gears of engines.
Eccles
singer and bandleader. Eckstine sang with EARL HINES’s big band (1939–
43), then formed his own band in 1944. Sympathetic with the new sounds
of BEBOP, Eckstine engaged many of its innovators, including DIZZY GILLESPIE,
CHARLIE PARKER, and SARAH VAUGHAN. Disbanding the group in 1947, he
achieved greater popular success as a solo performer, specializing in bal-
lads that featured his deep, resonant baritone. He was one of the greatest
interpreters of popular song and blues in jazz.
eclampsia See PREECLAMPSIA AND ECLAMPSIA
eclipsing variable star or eclipsing binary BINAR Y STAR in an orbit
ABLE STAR.
ecliptic
tal investment, research and development, and export strategies. See also
CAPITALISM, COMMUNISM, SOCIALISM, ZAIBATSU.
MATHEMATICS, POLITICAL SCIENCE, and SOCIOLOGY.
Economist, The Weekly magazine of news and opinion, founded in
1843 and published in London, generally regarded as one of the world’s
preeminent journals of its kind. It gives thorough and wide-ranging cov-
erage of general news and particularly of international political develop-
ments that bear on the world’s economy. In accord with the views
promoted by its founders and conveyed by legendary Economist editor
WALTER BAGEHOT, the publication maintains the position that free markets
typically provide the best method of running economies and governments.
North America accounts for about half of its total readership.
ecosystem
GROWTH.
and STRATIGRAPHY.
also ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
ecoterrorism or ecological terrorism or environmental ter-
ectopic pregnancy
Eddy, Mary Baker orig. Mary
edelweiss
Edgeworth-Kuiper belt See KUIPER BELT
Edinburgh
values and accumulated knowledge of a society. In developing cultures
there is often little formal education; children learn from their environ-
ment and activities, and the adults around them act as teachers. In more
complex societies, where there is more knowledge to be passed on, a more
selective and efficient means of transmission—the school and teacher—
becomes necessary. The content of formal education, its duration, and who
receives it have varied widely from culture to culture and age to age, as
has the philosophy of education. Some philosophers (e.g., JOHN LOCKE)
have seen individuals as blank slates onto which knowledge can be writ-
ten. Others (e.g., Jean-Jacques ROUSSEAU) have seen the innate human state
as desirable in itself and therefore to be tampered with as little as pos-
sible, a view often taken in alternative education. See also BEHAVIOURISM;
JOHN DEWEY; ELEMENTAR Y EDUCATION; HIGHER EDUCATION; KINDERGARTEN; LYCEUM
MOVEMENT; PROGRESSIVE EDUCATION; PUBLIC SCHOOL; SPECIAL EDUCATION; TEACHING.
cation include PLATO, JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU, and JOHN DEWEY.
SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY.
PARK and QUEEN ELIZABETH NATIONAL PARK. It was named by HENR Y MORTON
Edward II known as Edward of Caernarfon
efficiency or mechanical efficiency In mechanics, the measure of
the effectiveness with which a system performs. It is stated as the ratio
of a system’s WORK output to its work input. The efficiency of a real sys-
tem is always less than 1 because of FRICTION between moving parts. A
machine with an efficiency of 0.8 returns 80% of the work input as work
output; the remaining 20% is used to overcome friction. In a theoretically
frictionless, or ideal, machine, the work input and work output are equal,
and the efficiency would be 1, or 100%.
effigy mound Earthen mound in the form of a bird or animal (e.g,
bear, deer, turtle, buffalo), found in the northern central U.S., especially
the Ohio River valley. Little is known of the effigy mounds except that
most were burial sites. The culture that produced them dates from AD 300
to the mid-17th century. See also HOPEWELL CULTURE.
Effigy Mounds National Monument Archaeological site, north-
eastern Iowa, U.S. Located on the Mississippi River, it covers 4 sq mi (10
sq km). Established in 1949, the monument has 183 known mounds, some
of which are in the shape of birds and bears. The mounds were built over
the course of the Woodland period (1000 BC–AD 1200), with the effigy
mounds probably constructed between AD 400 and 1200. Many mounds
have yielded copper, bone, and stone tools of Indian origin. One of the
bear mounds is 137 ft (42 m) long and 3.5 ft (1 m) high.
eft See NEWT
Egas Moniz
Edwards, Blake orig. William Blake McEdwards (b. July 26,
Egill Skallagrímsson
Ehrenberg
seen at LUXOR, KARNAK, ABYDOS, and ABU SIMBEL.
Ehrenburg
Eijkman
Eisenstein
AMERICA. Area: 8,124 sq mi (21,042 sq km). Population (2005 est.):
6,881,000. Capital: SAN SALVADOR. The majority of the people are mesti-
Elagabalus
Elbrus
in some areas to ensure a fairer distribution of legislative seats to con-
stituencies that may be denied representation under the plurality or major-
ity formulas. See also PARTY SYSTEM, PLURALITY SYSTEM, PRIMAR Y ELECTION.
Electra In Greek legend, the daughter of AGAMEMNON and Clytemnestra.
When Agamemnon was murdered by Clytemnestra and her lover Aegis-
thus, Electra saved her young brother ORESTES from the same fate by send-
ing him away. Orestes later returned, and Electra helped him kill their
mother and Aegisthus. She then married her brother’s friend Pylades. The
story is treated in plays by AESCHYLUS, SOPHOCLES, and EURIPIDES.
Electra complex See OEDIPUS COMPLEX
electric automobile Battery-powered motor vehicle. Originating in
the 1880s, electric cars were used for private passenger, truck, and bus
transportation in cities, where their low speeds and limited battery range
were not drawbacks, and the cars became popular for their quietness and
low maintenance costs. Until 1920 they were competitive with gasoline-
fueled cars; they became less so after the electric self-starter made
gasoline-powered cars more attractive and MASS PRODUCTION made them
cheaper to produce. In Europe electric vehicles have been used as short-
range delivery vans. Renewed interest in electric cars beginning in the
1970s, spurred especially by new consciousness of foreign oil dependency
and environmental concern, led to improvements in speed and range.
Recent laws, particularly in California, have mandated commercial pro-
duction. “Hybrid” cars employing both electric and internal combustion
engines and providing the best features of both technologies, have recently
become commercially available. Experimental vehicles have used solar
FUEL CELLS.
electric circuit See CIRCUIT
electric dipole
electrical impedance
electromyography
ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION.
bined with QUANTUM MECHANICS into the theory of QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS.
FORCE and the STRONG FORCE.
Examples include RADIO WAVES, INFRARED RADIATION, visible LIGHT, ULTRAVIOLET
RADIATION, X RAYS, and GAMMA RAYS. Electromagnetic radiation exhibits
wavelike properties such as REFLECTION, REFRACTION, DIFFRACTION, and INTERFER-
ENCE, but also exhibits particlelike properties in that its energy occurs in
discrete packets, or quanta. Though all types of electromagnetic radiation
travel at the same speed, they vary in FREQUENCY and WAVELENGTH, and inter-
act with matter differently. A VACUUM is the only perfectly transparent
medium; all others absorb some frequencies of electromagnetic radiation.
electromagnetic spectrum Total range of FREQUENCIES or WAVELENGTHs
of ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION. The spectrum ranges from waves of long
wavelength (low frequency) to those of short wavelength (high fre-
quency); it comprises, in order of increasing frequency (or decreasing
wavelength): very-low-frequency to ultrahigh-frequency RADIO WAVEs,
MICROWAVEs, INFRARED RADIATION, visible LIGHT, ULTRAVIOLET RADIATION, X-RAYs,
and GAMMA RAYs. In a VACUUM, all waves of the electromagnetic spectrum
travel at the same speed: 299,792,458 m/sec (186,282 mi/sec).
AUDION,
electrophoresis
Eleusinian Mysteries
Elephant Man orig. Joseph (Carey) Merrick (b. Aug. 5, 1862,
Elgin
by Tory opponents in England and French-Canadian rioters in Montreal.
He negotiated the Reciprocity Treaty (1854) between the Canadian colo-
nies and the U.S. In 1857 he left Canada to serve in diplomatic posts in
China, Japan, and India.
Elgin Marbles
ential English-language modernist poet. He won the Nobel Prize for Lit-
erature in 1948; from then until his death he achieved public admiration
unequaled by any other 20th-century poet.
miraculously changed into roses. This transformation convinced him of the
worthiness of her kind endeavours, about which he had been chiding her.
Elizabethan
Elsevier family See ELZEVIR FAMILY
Elsheimer
Embargo Act Legislation by the U.S. Congress in December 1807 that
closed U.S. ports to all exports and restricted imports from Britain. The
act was Pres. THOMAS JEFFERSON’s response to British and French interfer-
ence with neutral U.S. merchant ships during the NAPOLEONIC WARS. The
embargo had little effect in Europe, but it imposed an unpopular restric-
tion on New England merchants and exporters (see HARTFORD CONVENTION).
Legislation passed in 1809 lifted the embargo, but continued British inter-
ference with U.S. shipping led to the WAR OF 1812.
Embden
émigré nobility
assumption of the title, as a putative successor of Charlemagne, was a
direct threat to the HABSBURG DYNASTY. Queen VICTORIA of Britain took the title
empress of India. Non-European peoples whose rulers have been called
emperor include the Chinese, Japanese, Mughals, Incas, and Aztecs.
emphysema
harvest and before the next growing season, the land was used by the
community for the grazing of livestock and other purposes. In England
the movement for enclosure began in the 12th century and proceeded rap-
idly from 1450 to 1640; the process was virtually complete by the end of
the 19th century. In the rest of Europe, enclosure made little progress until
the 19th century. Common rights over arable land have now been largely
eliminated.
encomienda
endoscopy
English Channel or the Channel French La Manche
turbines. INTERNAL-COMBUSTION ENGINES were developed by NIKOLAUS OTTO
and RUDOLF DIESEL in the late 19th century. Gas turbines and rocket engines
came into use in the later 20th century. See also DIESEL ENGINE, GASOLINE
ENGINE, JET ENGINE, ROCKET, and ROTAR Y ENGINE.
engineering Professional art of applying science to the optimum con-
version of the resources of nature to the uses of humankind. Engineering
is based principally on physics, chemistry, and mathematics and their
NEERING, CIVIL ENGINEERING, CHEMICAL ENGINEERING. GENETIC ENGINEERING, MECHANI-
CAL ENGINEERING, MILITAR Y ENGINEERING.
ENIAC
iron) in magnesium- and iron-rich igneous rock types. Enstatite crystal-
lizes in the orthorhombic system (three unequal axes at right angles to
each other).
entablature Assemblage of horizontal moldings and bands supported
by the columns of Classical buildings. The entablature is usually divided
into three main sections: the lowest band, or architrave, which originally
took the form of a beam running from support to support; the central band,
or frieze, consisting of an unmolded strip with or without ornament; and
the top band, or cornice, constructed from a series of moldings that project
from the edge of the frieze. Most entablatures correspond to or are derived
from the Doric, Ionic, or Corinthian ORDER.
entamoeba
Eocene
Epicurus
fers from cells in which episomes have been incorporated in the chromo-
somes have been used to determine the locations of genes on the
chromosome.
epistatic gene
privileges and protections, such as exemption from compulsory military
service and economic support by their husbands. Supporters, led by the
NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN, argued that discriminatory state and
federal laws left many women in a state of economic dependency.
equality Generally, an ideal of uniformity in treatment or status by those
in a position to affect either. Acknowledgment of the right to equality often
must be coerced from the advantaged by the disadvantaged. Equality of
opportunity was the founding creed of U.S. society, but equality among
all peoples and between the sexes has proved easier to legislate than to
achieve in practice. Social or religious inequality is deeply ingrained in
some cultures and thus difficult to overcome (see CASTE). Government
efforts to achieve economic equality include enhancing opportunities
through tax policy, subsidized training and education, redistributing
wealth or resources, and preferential treatment of those historically treated
unequally (see AFFIRMATIVE ACTION). See also CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT; FEMINISM;
GAY RIGHTS MOVEMENT; HUMAN RIGHTS; UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS.
DIFFERENTIAL
laws of PHYSICS. See also SYSTEM OF EQUATIONS.
by British authorities (1827–58) before the
official takeover by the Spanish. The main-
land was not effectively occupied by the
Spanish until 1936.
Independence was
declared in 1968, followed by a reign of
terror and economic chaos under the dictatorial president Macías Nguema,
who was overthrown by a military coup in 1979 and later executed.
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo became leader of the country in 1979.
A new constitution was adopted in 1982, but political unrest persisted into
the 21st century despite the country’s oil wealth.
eques
equation, algebraic See ALGEBRAIC EQUATION
equation, difference See DIFFERENCE EQUATION
equation, quadratic See QUADRATIC EQUATION
equation of motion See equation of MOTION
equation of state See equation of STATE
equations, system of See SYSTEM OF EQUATIONS
Equator Great circle around the Earth that is everywhere equidistant
from the geographic poles and lies in a plane perpendicular to the Earth’s
axis. This geographic, or terrestrial, Equator divides the Earth into the
Northern and Southern Hemispheres and forms the imaginary reference
line on the Earth’s surface from which LATITUDE is reckoned (i.e., 0° lati-
tude). In astronomy, the celestial equator is the great circle in which the
plane of the terrestrial Equator intersects the celestial sphere; it is thus
equidistant from the celestial poles. When the Sun lies in its plane, day
and night are everywhere of equal length; this happens at the EQUINOXes.
Equatorial Africa See FRENCH EQUATORIAL AFRICA
equatorial coordinates See CELESTIAL COORDINATES
descended from the dawn horse (see EOHIPPUS). Wild horses, which once
inhabited much of northern Eurasia, were smaller and had shorter legs
than their domesticated descendants. See also PRZEWALSKI’S HORSE.
equinox
in approximation theory with Paul Turan, and with Atle Selberg gave an
astounding elementary proof of the prime number theorem (1949).
Famously eccentric, he traveled almost constantly for his last 40 years,
collaborating with hundreds of mathematicians on numerous problems.
Erech
Erigena
palatial buildings, royal tombs, and paved roads have been uncovered,
leading to hypotheses that the site represents a Xia capital. The society
employed advanced bronze technology. The relationship between Erlitou
bronzes and those produced earlier at Qijia in Gansu remains unclear. See
HONGSHAN CULTURE; NEOLITHIC PERIOD.
ermine
WATERGATE SCANDAL, he became something of a folk hero for his unceas-
ing pursuit of evidence in the face of White House claims of executive
privilege. His earthy humour, distinctive accent, and unfailing charm con-
tributed to his popularity.
Erving, Julius (Winfield) (b. Feb. 22, 1950, Roosevelt, N.Y., U.S.)
U.S. basketball star. He played two years at the University of Massachu-
setts before joining the professional American Basketball Association
(ABA). At 6 ft 7in.
(2 m), “Doctor J” played forward for the Virginia
Squires (1971–73) and the New York Nets (1973–76), whom he led to
two ABA titles (1974, 1976). After the merger of the ABA and NBA, Erv-
ing was traded to the Philadelphia 76ers (1977–87) and won a league title
in 1983. He was known for swarming defense, imaginative drives to the
basket, and climactic slam dunks.
erythema
Escoffier
Espartero
of the FRENCH REVOLUTION in 1789, when the deputies of the Third Estate
led in founding the NATIONAL ASSEMBLY.
Este family
Essex, Robert Devereux, 2nd earl of (b. Nov. 10, 1567, Neth-
Essex, Robert Devereux, 3rd
earl of (b. 1591, London, Eng.—d.
Sept. 14, 1646, London) English
military commander. Son of the 2nd earl of ESSEX, he began his military
career in 1620 and commanded forces for CHARLES I until the LONG PARLIA-
MENT deposed Charles’s ministers (1640). As the ENGLISH CIVIL WARS began,
he was appointed to command the Parliamentary army. He fought against
the Royalists at the indecisive Battle of Edgehill (1642) and advanced on
London in 1643. His army was besieged at Lostwithiel, Cornwall, in 1644,
and all surrendered except Essex, who escaped by sea. He resigned his
command in 1645.
Essex, Walter Devereux, 1st earl of (b. Sept. 16, 1541, Car-
marthen, Carmarthenshire, Wales—d. Sept. 22, 1576, Dublin, Ire.)
English soldier. Born to a titled family, he helped suppress a rebellion in
northern England in 1569 and was made earl of Essex in 1572. In 1573
he offered to subdue and colonize, at his own expense, a portion of Ulster
that had not accepted English overlordship. There he treacherously cap-
tured and executed the Irish rebel leaders and massacred hundreds of the
populace, contributing to Irish bitterness toward the English. ELIZABETH I
commanded him to break off the enterprise in 1575. He died of dysen-
tery shortly after returning to Ireland from England.
establishment clause or establishment-of-religion clause
Clause in the 1st Amendment to the U.S. CONSTITUTION forbidding Con-
gress from establishing a state religion. It prevents the passage of any law
that gives preference to or forces belief in any one religion. It is paired
with a clause that prohibits limiting the free expression of religion.
estate law Laws governing the nature and extent of an owner’s rights
with respect to REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY. When used in connection with
PROBATE proceedings, it refers to the laws governing the disposition of the
total property of whatever kind owned by a person at the time of death.
See also ESTATE TAX, PROPERTY, PROPERTY TAX.
Estates General or States General French États-Généraux.
In pre-Revolutionary France, the representative assembly of the three
“estates” or orders of the realm: the clergy and the nobility (both privi-
leged minorities) as well as the THIRD ESTATE, which represented the major-
ity of the people. Usually summoned by monarchs in times of crisis, the
Estates General met at irregular intervals from the 14th century on; it was
of limited effectiveness because the monarchy usually dealt with local
Estates instead. The last meeting of the Estates General was at the start
Estremadura See EXTREMADURA
estrogen
ether
Ethiopic
he held that humans are differentiated from the rest of the natural world
by their possession of a soul, an entity that cannot be explained in terms
of natural processes. He also was known as an interpreter of ARISTOTLE. He
won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1908.
Euclid
Eumenes
ing the PYRENEES, ALPS, APENNINES, CARPATHIANs, and BALKAN MOUNTAINS. A
(see KOSOVO CONFLICT; BOSNIAN CONFLICT). See also EUROPEAN UNION; NATO.
See map on following page.
Europe, Council of Organization of more than 40 European states
formed to promote European unity, protect human rights, and facilitate
social and economic progress. Established in 1949 by 10 western Euro-
pean states, it has devised international agreements on human rights and
established a number of special bodies and expert committees on social,
legal, and cultural issues. It is headquartered in Strasbourg, France. (The
Council of Europe should not be confused with the European Council,
which is a policy-making body of the EUROPEAN UNION.)
European Aeronautic Defence and Space Co. (EADS) Euro-
pean aerospace company that is one of the world’s largest. It was formed
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Europe (cid:2) European Economic Community
European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) International
organization established in 1958 to form a common market for develop-
ing peaceful uses of atomic energy. It originally had six members; it now
includes all members of the EUROPEAN UNION. Among its aims were to
facilitate the establishment of a nuclear energy industry on a European
rather than a national scale, coordinate research, encourage construction
of power plants, establish safety regulations, and establish a common
market for trade in nuclear equipment and materials. In 1967 its govern-
ing bodies were merged into the EUROPEAN COMMUNITY.
European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) Administrative
agency designed to integrate the coal and steel industries of France, West
Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg. It originated
in the plan of ROBERT SCHUMAN (1950) to establish a common market for
coal and steel by those countries willing to submit to an independent
authority. Created in 1952, the ECSC came to include all members of the
EUROPEAN UNION. It initially removed barriers to trade in coal, coke, steel,
pig iron, and scrap iron; it later supervised the reduction of its members’
excess production. In 1967 its governing bodies were merged into the
EUROPEAN COMMUNITY. When the treaty expired in 2002, the ECSC was dis-
solved.
European Community (EC) Organization formed in 1967 with the
merger of the EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY, EUROPEAN COAL AND STEEL
COMMUNITY, and EUROPEAN ATOMIC ENERGY COMMUNITY. The merger created a
judges. See also INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE.
European Defense Community (EDC) Attempt by western Euro-
pean powers, with U.S. support, to counterbalance the overwhelming con-
ventional military ascendancy of the Soviet Union in Europe by creating
a supranational European army, including West German forces. A treaty
was concluded in 1952, but the French parliament’s refusal to ratify the
treaty in 1954 brought an end to the project. One consequence of the
French action was the decision in 1955 to rearm West Germany and allow
its entry into NATO. In 1955 the EDC was replaced by the WESTERN EURO-
PEAN UNION.
European Economic Community (EEC) later European Com-
munity (EC) known as the Common Market Association of Euro-
pean countries designed to promote European economic unity. It was
established by the TREATY OF ROME in 1957 to develop the economies of the
member states into a single common market and to build a political union
of the states of western Europe. The EEC also sought to establish a single
commercial policy toward nonmember countries, to coordinate transpor-
tation systems, agricultural policies, and general economic policies, to
remove measures restricting free competition, and to assure the mobility
of labour, capital, and entrepreneurship among member states. The liber-
alized trade policies it sponsored from the 1950s were highly successful
in increasing trade and economic prosperity in western Europe. In 1967
its governing bodies were merged into the EUROPEAN COMMUNITY. In 1993
the EEC was renamed the European Community (EC); it is now the prin-
cipal organization within the EUROPEAN UNION.
European Free Trade Association (EFTA) International organi-
European Space Agency (ESA) French Agence Spatiale
Européenne Western European space and space-technology research
organization headquartered in Paris. It was founded in 1975 from the
merger of the European Launcher Development Organisation (ELDO) and
the European Space Research Organisation (ESRO), both established in
1964. Members are Austria, Belgium, Britain, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Ireland, Italy, The Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Swe-
den, and Switzerland. Canada, through a special cooperative agreement,
participates in some projects. The ESA developed the Ariane series of
space launch vehicles, and it supports a launch facility in French Guiana.
It has launched a system of meteorological satellites (Meteosat) as well
as the Giotto space probe, which examined the nucleus of HALLEY’S COMET,
and Hipparcos, a satellite that measured the PARALLAXes, positions, and
PROPER MOTIONs of more than 100,000 stars. It is also a participant in the
construction of the INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION.
eurypterid
Cressida in WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE’s
peare, GEORGE BERNARD SHAW, and
Evans, Frederick H(enry) (b.
Evans-Pritchard, Sir E(dward) E(van) (b. Sept. 21, 1902, Crow-
evaporite
the amount of solar radiation, atmospheric vapor pressure, temperature,
wind, and soil moisture. Evapotranspiration accounts for most of the water
lost from the soil during the growth of a crop. Estimation of evapotrans-
piration rates is thus important in planning IRRIGATION schemes.
Evarts
EVOLUTION, ERNST MAYR, PARALLEL EVOLUTION, PHYLOGENY, SOCIOCULTURAL EVOLUTION,
SPECIATION.
Evripos Strait See EURIPUS STRAIT
Ewald
keeps the power of the executive more or less equal to that of the JUDI-
CIAR Y and the LEGISLATURE. See also MAYOR, PRESIDENT, PRIME MINISTER.
exegesis
of murder may be reduced to manslaughter if the accused is found to be
suffering diminished capacity (see DIMINISHED RESPONSIBILITY). The Italian
penal code allows consideration of motives of honour. Extenuating cir-
cumstances also are a factor in many civil actions.
extinction (of species) Dying out or termination of a species. It
occurs when a species can no longer reproduce at replacement levels.
Most past extinctions are thought to have resulted from environmental
changes that the doomed species was either unable to adapt to or that
caused it to adapt so thoroughly that it became a distinctly new species.
The effect of humans on the environment, through hunting, collecting,
and habitat destruction, has become the principal factor in plant and ani-
mal extinctions.
extortion Unlawful exaction of money or property through intimida-
tion or undue exercise of authority. It may include threats of physical
harm, criminal prosecution, or public exposure. Some forms of threat,
especially those made in writing, are occasionally singled out for sepa-
rate statutory treatment as blackmail. See also BRIBER Y.
extradition Process by which one state, at the request of another,
returns a person for trial for a crime punishable by the laws of the request-
ing state and committed outside the state of refuge. Extradition is regu-
lated within countries by extradition acts and between countries by
treaties. Some principles of extradition are common to many countries.
Most decline to surrender their own nationals. Countries also generally
recognize the right of political ASYLUM. In view of the solidarity of nations
in the repression of crime, however, countries are usually willing to coop-
erate in bringing criminals to justice.
extrasensory perception (ESP) Perception that involves awareness
of information about something (such as a person or event) not gained
through the SENSEs and not deducible from previous experience. Classic
forms of ESP include telepathy, clairvoyance, and precognition. No con-
clusive demonstrations of the existence of ESP in any individual have
been given, but popular belief in the phenomenon remains widespread,
and people who claim to possess ESP are sometimes employed by inves-
tigative teams searching for missing persons or things. See also PARAPSY-
CHOLOGY.
extrasolar planets See PLANETS OF OTHER STARS
extravert See INTROVERT AND EXTRAVERT
Extremadura or Estremadura
explosive Any substance or device that can produce a volume of rap-
idly expanding GAS in an extremely brief period. Mechanical explosives,
which depend on a physical reaction (e.g., overloading a container with
compressed air until it bursts), are little used except in mining. Nuclear
explosives (see NUCLEAR WEAPON) use either NUCLEAR FISSION or NUCLEAR FUSION.
Export-Import Bank of the United States (Ex-Im Bank) One
ROUAULT, CHAIM SOUTINE, MAX BECKMANN, KÄTHE KOLLWITZ, and ERNST BARLACH.
The group of artists known as Der BLAUE REITER were also considered
Expressionists. Expressionism was the dominant style in Germany after
World War I; postwar Expressionists included GEORGE GROSZ and OTTO
DIX. Its emotional qualities were adopted by other 20th-century art move-
ments. See also ABSTRACT EXPRESSIONISM.
extenuating circumstance or mitigating circumstance In
Exupéry, Antoine de Saint- See Antoine de SAINT-EXUPÉR Y
Eyasi
the PERSIAN GULF WAR.
FaFlall)h
pastel colours. Some grow to 1 in. (2.5 cm) or more in length. They live
in freshwater ponds in Europe, Central Asia, western North America, the
drier regions of Africa, and Australia. See also SHRIMP.
fairy tale Simple narrative typically of folk origin dealing with super-
natural beings. Fairy tales may be written or told for the amusement of
children or may have a more sophisticated narrative containing super-
natural or obviously improbable events, scenes, and personages and often
having a whimsical, satirical, or moralistic character. The term embraces
popular folktales such as “Cinderella” and “Puss in Boots,” as well as art
fairy tales of later invention, such as those by HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN. It
is often difficult to distinguish between tales of literary and oral origin,
because folktales have received literary treatment from early times, and
literary tales can often be traced back to oral tradition.
Faisalabad
and ROBERT STEPHENSON designed two tubular railway bridges in Wales;
Fairbairn designed the hydraulic riveters used in constructing one of them.
Fairbanks City (pop., 2000: 30,224), east-central Alaska, U.S., situ-
ated at the junction of the Tanana and Chena rivers. Founded in 1902 after
a gold strike, it was named for Charles W. Fairbanks. As the northern
terminus of the ALASKA HIGHWAY and the railroad, it is the main supply
centre for the northern Alaskan oil business (see TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE).
Located nearby are Fort Wainwright, Eielson Air Force Base, and the
University of Alaska, Fairbanks (1917). Fairbanks is the site of the annual
800-mi (1,290-km) Yukon Marathon boat race and the North American
Championship Sled Dog Races.
Fairbanks, Douglas orig. Douglas Elton Ulman (b. May 23,
Fairfax (of Cameron), Thomas Fairfax, 3rd Baron (b. Jan. 17,
holes or on cliff ledges. Some species capture birds in midair; others live
on hares, mice, lizards, and insects. See also GYRFALCON, HAWK, KESTREL, MER-
LIN, PEREGRINE FALCON.
Falconet
name St. ISIDORE OF SEVILLA. The collection was intended to protect the rights
of diocesan bishops against encroachment by their metropolitan superi-
ors and to protect the clergy from lay interference. The decretals also
emphasized the authority of the pope at the expense of that of the arch-
bishops. They consist of laws, papal letters, and decrees of councils—
some genuine but many (including the famous DONATION OF CONSTANTINE)
forgeries. Widely accepted by the end of the 10th century, the collection
was not proved a hoax until the 17th century.
falsework or centering Temporary framework used during construc-
tion to support arches and similar structures while the mortar or concrete
is setting or the steel is being joined. As soon as the work is set and the
structure is self-supporting, the centering is struck (carefully removed).
Falun Gong
1966 he was sent to a communal farm to be reeducated. After the death
of MAO ZEDONG in 1976, Fang’s party membership was restored.
Appointed a vice president of one branch of Keda in 1985, he began work
on restructuring it and reforming educational policy. During the demon-
strations in Tiananmen Square he took refuge in the U.S. embassy, and
in 1990 he and his wife were allowed to leave China. He subsequently
conducted research in Britain and the U.S.
Fanon
Farnese, Alessandro, duke di Parma and Piacenza (b. Aug.
27, 1545, Rome—d. Dec. 3, 1592, Arras, France) Regent of the Nether-
lands (1578–92) for PHILIP II of Spain. He was educated at the court of
Madrid, where he had been sent to prove his father’s loyalty to the Hab-
sburgs. In 1578 Philip II appointed him governor-general of the Nether-
lands, where his mother, MARGARET OF PARMA, had been regent earlier. His
great achievement was the restoration of Spanish rule in the southern
provinces and perpetuation of Roman Catholicism there. He succeeded
by astute statesmanship and military operations against the alliance of
rebellious Protestant provinces led by WILLIAM THE SILENT. In 1586 he suc-
ceeded his father as duke of Parma and Piacenza, but he never returned
to Italy to rule.
Farnese
joined the NATION OF ISLAM in 1955, and for a time he assisted MALCOLM X
in Boston. After Malcolm converted to SUNNI Islam, Farrakhan denounced
him and replaced him as minister of Mosque No. 7 in Harlem. Farrakhan
later expressed regret at having contributed to the climate of antagonism
that preceded Malcolm’s assassination in 1965. When Warith Deen
Mohammed, ELIJAH MUHAMMAD’s successor as leader of the Nation of Islam,
gradually began integrating the organization into the orthodox Muslim
community, Farrakhan broke away and formed his own organization, also
called the Nation of Islam (1978). A compelling orator whose rhetoric
often descended into overt ANTI-SEMITISM, Farrakhan was nonetheless effec-
tive in encouraging African American self-reliance and unity. He was the
main organizer of the Million Man March on Washington, D.C., in 1995.
In 2000 Farrakhan and Mohammed recognized each other as fellow Mus-
lims, and Farrakhan subsequently moved his group closer to orthodox
Islam and moderated his racial remarks.
Farrar
Fatah
Faunus
dance. Creation begins at the most perfect level, God, and descends
through the world of the spirit to the least perfect level, the world of mat-
ter. The fayF theory was refuted by al-GHAZ0Lq in the 11th century.
FayÆal
been adopted by the opposition Democratic Party, and the Federalist Party
disappeared. Notable Federalists included JOHN MARSHALL, RUFUS KING,
TIMOTHY PICKERING, and CHARLES PINCKNEY.
Feininger
PARTY.
make them useful for interpreting the origins of rocks. Natural feldspars
can be divided into ALKALI and PLAGIOCLASE feldspars.
feldspar, alkali See ALKALI FELDSPAR
feldspathoid
fenghuang or feng-huang
of Succession to allow his daughter (the future ISABELLA II) instead of his
brother (Don Carlos [1788–1855]) to succeed him, which triggered the
opposition movement, CARLISM.
Ferdinand the Catholic See FERDINAND V
Ferdowsl
after the fall of NAPOLEON, as king of the united Kingdom of the Two
Sicilies. His despotic rule led to an uprising in 1820, after which he was
forced to grant a constitution. With Austria’s aid, he overthrew the con-
stitutional government in 1821.
Ferdinand II known as Ferdinand the Catholic Spanish
Fernando el Católico (b. March 10, 1452, Sos, Aragon—d. Jan. 23,
1516) King of Aragon from 1479, king of Castile (as Ferdinand V) from
1474 (joint sovereign with Queen ISABELLA I until 1504), king of Sicily (as
Ferdinand II, 1468–1516), and king of Naples (as Ferdinand III, 1503–
16). The son of John II of Aragon (1398–1479), Ferdinand married Isa-
bella of Castile in 1469 and fought to impose his authority over the nobles
in the two kingdoms. As part of an effort to modernize Castile, they
banned all religions other than Roman Catholicism, leading to the SPAN-
ISH INQUISITION (1478) and the expulsion of the Jews (1492). Conquest of
Granada in 1492 made it possible to support CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS’s voy-
ages to the New World. Ferdinand furthered his expansionary policies in
the Mediterranean and in Africa. After the conquest of Naples in 1503,
during the ITALIAN WARS, Spain rivaled France as the most powerful state
in Europe. By uniting the Spanish kingdoms into the nation of Spain, Fer-
dinand began Spain’s entry into the modern period of imperial expansion.
Ferdinand II (Aragon) See FERDINAND V
Fermat
Many are small, fragile plants; others are treelike (see TREE FERN). The life
cycle is characterized by an ALTERNATION OF GENERATIONS between the mature,
fronded form (the SPOROPHYTE) familiar in greenhouses and gardens and the
form that strongly resembles a MOSS or LIVERWORT (the GAMETOPHYTE). Ferns
are popular houseplants.
Fernando Póo See BIOKO
Ferrara
and Senate (1854–64, 1865–69). Originally a Whig, he opposed the exten-
sion of slavery to the territories, and he was one of the leaders of the
movement that resulted in the formation of the REPUBLICAN PARTY (1854).
Despite his personal dislike for Pres. ANDREW JOHNSON, he voted for acquit-
tal in Johnson’s Senate impeachment trial.
fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) Various CONGENITAL DISORDERs in a
newborn caused by the mother drinking alcohol during pregnancy. The
main symptoms are retarded growth, abnormalities of the central NERVOUS
SYSTEM, and certain face and head abnormalities. The child may be men-
tally retarded. Behavioral problems (e.g., poor concentration, impulsive-
ness) are sometimes the only obvious symptoms. The syndrome is
common in babies born to chronic alcoholics, but health care organiza-
tions now commonly recommend that women cease drinking alcohol
entirely while pregnant. Other disorders have been linked to alcohol in
breast milk.
fetial
represented a substantial group in the Legislative Assembly, but it disap-
peared when the insurrection of 1792 overthrew the monarchy.
fever or pyrexia
Practical Reason (1788), was his most original and characteristic work.
To demonstrate that PRACTICAL REASON is really the root of reason in its
entirety, the absolute ground of all knowledge as well as of humanity
altogether, he started from a supreme principle, the ego, which is inde-
pendent and sovereign, so that all other knowledge is deducible from it.
In his famous patriotic lectures Addresses to the German Nation (1807–
08) he attempted to rally German nationalists against Napoleon. He is
regarded as one of the great transcendental idealists. His son Immanuel
Hermann von Fichte (1796–1879) was also a philosopher.
Ficino
Fighting Falcon See F-16
fighting fish See SIAMESE FIGHTING FISH
Figueres
political corruption; because of his sharp commentary he was eventually
effectively banished from the theatre, whereupon he took up the study of
law. In 1748 he was appointed a magistrate, in which role he established
a new tradition of justice and suppression of crime in London. He prob-
ably wrote Shamela (1741), a burlesque of SAMUEL RICHARDSON’s Pamela
that he never claimed. In the entertaining and original Joseph Andrews
(1742) he also parodies Richardson’s novel. Tom Jones (1749), his most
popular work, is noted for its great comic gusto, vast gallery of charac-
ters, and contrasted scenes of high- and lowlife. The more sober Amelia
(1751) anticipates the Victorian domestic novel. In these works he helped
develop the English novel as a planned, realistic narrative genre survey-
ing contemporary society.
fieldlark See PIPIT
Fields, Dame Gracie orig. Grace Stansfield (b. Jan. 9, 1898,
Fields, W.C. orig. William Claude Dukenfield (b. Jan. 29, 1880,
Fiesole, Mino da See MINO DA FIESOLE
PIDOU (1969–74), VALER Y GISCARD D’ESTAING (1974–81), FRANCOIS MITTERRAND
Filarete
SERGEI EISENSTEIN, FILM NOIR, NEW WAVE.
filter-pressing Process that occurs during crystallization of certain
IGNEOUS ROCKS, in which liquid is separated from the crystals by pressure.
As the crystals grow and accumulate in MAGMA, a crystal mesh may be
formed. Pressure applied by the weight of crystals above or by outside
forces may force the more mobile liquid out of the mesh and also may
fracture or crush the remaining crystals. Filter-pressing has been used to
explain the formation of rocks consisting of only one kind of mineral.
fin whale or finback whale or razorback whale or common
rorqual
Finlay
676 I
fir (cid:2) First International
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
KARL MAR X, Pierre-Joseph PROUDHON, LOUIS-AUGUSTE BLANQUI, and MIKHAIL
BAKUNIN. A clash between Marx’s centralized SOCIALISM and Bakunin’s
ANARCHISM in 1872 caused the International to split, and it was dissolved
in 1876. Though it was feared at the time as a formidable power with
millions of members, and several countries tried to have it outlawed, its
membership was never more than 20,000 and it served mainly as a uni-
fying force for labour in Europe.
Fischer-Dieskau
FIS See ISLAMIC SALVATION FRONT
of the work of ECONOMIC STABILIZERS. See also BUSINESS CYCLE.
Fischer projection Method of representing the three-dimensional
structures of MOLECULEs on a page, devised by EMIL FISCHER. By convention,
horizontal lines represent bonds projecting from the plane of the paper
toward the viewer, and vertical lines represent bonds projecting away from
the viewer. Fischer projections are a convenient way to depict chiral mol-
ecules (see OPTICAL ACTIVITY) and distinguish between pairs of enantiomers
(see RACEMATE). They are most often used to depict ISOMERs of the SUGARs.
See also CHEMICAL FORMULA.
Fischer, Bobby orig. Robert James Fischer (b. March 9, 1943,
Chicago, Ill., U.S.) U.S. chess mas-
ter. He became a grandmaster at age
15, then a record. In 1972 Fischer
defeated BORIS SPASSKY to become the
only American to win the world
chess championship. An intense and
eccentric personality, he was a
devout Christian fundamentalist who
frequently condemned the Soviet
Union for godlessness; he was
deprived of his title in 1975 after
refusing to meet his Soviet chal-
lenger, ANATOLY KARPOV. He remained
out of the game thereafter except for
a victorious private rematch with
Spassky in Yugoslavia in 1992; the game violated U.S. sanctions against
Yugoslavia, and Fischer has remained abroad ever since.
Fischer, Emil (Hermann) (b. Oct. 9, 1852, Euskirchen, Prussia—d.
July 15, 1919, Berlin, Ger.) German organic chemist. He received his
Ph.D. in 1874. He determined the structures of URIC ACID, CAFFEINE, and
related compounds, showing that all are derivatives of a single compound
he named PURINE. This led him to study PROTEIN structure and the ways in
which AMINO ACIDs are combined in proteins. He determined the molecu-
lar structures of GLUCOSE, FRUCTOSE, and many other SUGARs, verifying his
results by synthesizing each, and distinguished the 15 stereoisomers of
glucose (see ISOMER; CONFIGURATION; OPTICAL ACTIVITY). His researches into the
sugars were of unparalleled importance to organic chemistry and earned
him in 1902 the second Nobel Prize for Chemistry. His investigations of
FERMENTATION laid the foundations of ENZYME chemistry.
fitnah
Fisher (of Kilverstone), John Arbuthnot Fisher, 1st Baron
CAMPAIGN.
Fiume question
Flagstad
also PLAICE; SOLE.
Flaubert
ROGIER VAN DER WEYDEN, PETRUS CHRISTUS, DIRCK BOUTS, HUGO VAN DER GOES,
the Flemish BAROQUE PERIOD. See also EARLY NETHERLANDISH ART.
Flemish language See DUTCH LANGUAGE
Fletcher, John See Francis BEAUMONT
Fleury
Florence Italian Firenze
684 I
Florida (cid:2) flower
Florida Controversy, West See WEST FLORIDA CONTROVERSY
F. GREENAWAY—NATURAL HISTORY PHOTOGRAPHIC
AGENCY/EB INC.
Flounder (Platichthys)
The life cycle of a flowering plant. (1) A pollen grain is released from the anther
and settles on the stigma. (2) A pollen tube forms and grows through the style
toward the ovule opening (micropyle). (3) Two of the nuclei (polar nuclei) in the
ovule’s embryo sac migrate to the centre to form a single cell. Three cells migrate to
the micropyle, and one enlarges to become the egg. Two sperm that have formed
from mitotic division of the pollen grain’s generative cell enter the embryo sac
through the micropyle. (4) One sperm fuses with the egg, resulting in a fertilized
egg (zygote), which develops into an embryo. The second sperm fuses with the two
polar nuclei to form the endosperm nucleus. (5) This nucleus divides to form a tissue
(endosperm) that provides nutrients for the developing embryo.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
fluorine
flu See INFLUENZA
Fluxus
Focke-Wulf 190 (Fw 190)
Fontane
690 I
fool’s gold (cid:2) football
century. Often deformed, dwarfed, or crippled, fools were kept for luck
as well as amusement, in the belief that deformity can avert the evil eye
and that abusive raillery can transfer ill luck from the abused to the abuser.
In some societies, they were regarded as inspired with poetic and pro-
phetic powers. The greatest literary characterization of the fool is found
in WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE’s King Lear.
fool’s gold See PYRITE
OF UNITS; YARD.
PROSODY.
since 1929. In early 2001 a major outbreak occurred in the United King-
dom, followed shortly by outbreaks in The Netherlands and France.
football or association football or soccer Game in which two
also AUSTRALIAN RULES FOOTBALL; GAELIC FOOTBALL; FOOTBALL, GRIDIRON; and RUGBY.
Foot, Michael (b. July 23, 1913,
Plymouth, Devon, Eng.) Leader of
Great Britain’s LABOUR PARTY (1980–
83). He worked as a newspaper edi-
tor and columnist (1937–74) and
served in Parliament
(1945–55,
1960–92). He served in HAROLD WIL-
SON’s cabinet as secretary of state for
employment (1974–76) and leader of
the House of Commons (1976–79).
A left-wing socialist, Foot became
the party’s chief in 1980 by defeat-
ing its right-wing candidate. This
and other left-wing trends caused
some Labourites to resign to found
the Social Democratic Party. His
books include Aneurin Bevan (2 vol.;
1962, 1973).
foot-and-mouth
disease
(FMD)
or hoof-and-mouth
disease Highly contagious viral
disease of cloven-footed mammals
(including cattle), spread by inges-
tion and inhalation. The afflicted ani-
mal develops
fever and painful
blisters on the tongue, lips, other tis-
sues of the mouth, muzzle or snout,
teats, and feet. FMD is endemic in
many places. Because of its rapid
spread and impact on animal produc-
tivity, it is considered the most eco-
nomically
devastating
livestock
disease in the world. It is not a human
health hazard. No effective treatment
exists; vaccines control epidemics
but have not eliminated them. Since
the virus can persist, quarantine,
slaughter, cremation or burial of car-
casses, and decontamination must be
rigorous. Strict surveillance has kept
North America largely FMD-free
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
A professional football (soccer) field. International rules allow for variations in the overall field dimensions, but the touch lines
must be longer than the goal lines. Play begins with a kickoff at the center line. When the ball is driven across the touch line, it
is put back in play by a throw-in by the opposing side. A ball driven over the goal line but not into the goal by the attacking
team is returned to play with a goal kick by the opposing goalkeeper. A player fouled in the penalty area is awarded a penalty
kick at the goal, which is defended only by the goalkeeper. Within the goal area the goalkeeper may use his hands to stop and
hold the ball.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
An American professional football field. The standard college field is nearly identical but has a wider inbounds zone. When-
ever the ball is downed in a side zone, it is put in play on the next down at the nearest inbounds line. The line marking the end
zone (within which the ball may be caught) is the goal line.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
FOOTBALL LEAGUE.
forage
692 I
Ford (cid:2) foreign workers
FOUNDATION.
Ford, John orig. Sean Aloysius O’Feeney or O’Fearna (b. Feb.
Ford, Tennessee Ernie orig. Ernest Jennings (b. Feb. 13, 1919,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
foreclosure Legal proceeding by which a borrower’s rights to a mort-
gaged property may be extinguished if the borrower fails to live up to the
obligations agreed to in the loan contract. The lender may then declare
the entire debt due and owing and may seek to satisfy it by foreclosing.
Foreclosure is commonly by a court-decreed sale of the property to the
highest bidder, who is often the lender. See also MORTGAGE.
foreign aid Transfer of capital, goods, or services from one country to
another. Foreign aid may be given in the form of capital transfers or tech-
nical assistance and training for either civilian or military purposes. Its
use in the modern era began in the 18th century, when Prussia subsidized
some of its allies. After World War II, foreign aid developed into a more
sophisticated instrument of foreign policy. International organizations,
such as the UNITED NATIONS RELIEF AND REHABILITATION ADMINISTRATION, were
created to provide aid to war-ravaged countries and newly freed colonies.
Foreign aid is often given with conditions attached, such as the require-
ment that all or part of it be used to buy goods from the donor country.
See also INTERNATIONAL MONETAR Y FUND; MARSHALL PLAN; WORLD BANK.
EXCHANGE RATE.
Foreign Legion French Légion Étrangère. French military corps
foreign service or diplomatic service Staff of a state’s
Forest, Lee De See Lee DE FOREST
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Foreman (cid:2) form I
Woods forget-me-not (Myosotis sylvat-
INGMAR HOLMASEN
formaldehyde
forsterite-fayalite
ACROPOLIS.
Foscolo
and he ran as its presidential candidate in 1924, 1928, and 1932 on a plat-
form that envisioned the ultimate demise of capitalism and the establish-
ment of a workers’ republic. Ill health forced his resignation in 1932.
Soviet dissatisfaction with his successor, EARL BROWDER, brought him back
as chairman (1945–56), but he fell from favour and was made chairman
emeritus in 1957.
Foucault
four-colour map problem In TOPOLOGY, a long-standing conjecture
asserting that no more than four colours are required to shade in any map
such that each adjacent region is coloured differently. First posed in 1852
by Francis Guthrie, a British math student, it was solved by Kenneth
Appel and Wolfgang Haken using a computer-assisted proof in 1976.
Four Freedoms Essential social and political objectives described by
Pres. FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT in his State of the Union message in January 1941:
freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom from want, and freedom
from fear of physical aggression. He called for the last freedom to be
achieved through a “worldwide reduction in armaments.” In August 1941
he and WINSTON CHURCHILL included the four freedoms in the ATLANTIC CHAR-
Fourdrinier
submitted two draft constitutions to a popular vote in 1946, and the revi-
sion was narrowly approved. The structure of the Fourth Republic was
remarkably like that of the THIRD REPUBLIC. The lower house of parliament,
renamed the National Assembly, was the locus of power. Shaky coalition
cabinets succeeded one another, and the lack of a clear-cut majority ham-
pered coherent action. Political leaders included GEORGES BIDAULT, PIERRE
MENDÈS-FRANCE, RENÉ PLEVEN, and ROBERT SCHUMAN.
TIC FOX, BAT-EARED FOX, FENNEC, GRAY FOX.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Fowler (cid:2) foxhound
Fox, George (b. July 1624, Drayton-in-the-Clay, Leicestershire,
Eng.—d. Jan. 13, 1691, London) English preacher and founder of the
Society of FRIENDS, or Quakers. The son of a weaver, he left home at age
18 in search of religious experience. Probably beginning as a PURITAN, he
reacted even more strongly than the Puritans against the tradition of the
Church of ENGLAND and came to regard personal experience as the true
source of authority, placing God-given “inward light,” or inspiration,
above creeds and scripture. He traveled the countryside on foot, preach-
ing to small groups, and he and other preachers established congregations.
The Society of Friends arose in the 1650s. The Quakers’ denunciation of
ministers and public officials and their refusal to pay tithes or take oaths
led to persecution, and Fox was imprisoned eight times between 1649 and
1673. He made missionary trips to Ireland, the Caribbean islands, North
America, and northern Europe. His Journal gives an account of his life
and of the rise of Quakerism.
Fox, Vicente Quesada (b. July 2, 1942, Mexico City, Mex.) Presi-
dent of Mexico (2000– ) whose election ended 71 years of uninterrupted
rule by the INSTITUTIONAL REVOLUTIONAR Y PARTY (PRI). After earning a degree
in business administration from the Ibero-American University in Mexico
City, Fox took classes at Harvard Business School. He later worked for
the Coca-Cola Company, serving as its chief executive in Mexico (1975–
79). In 1987 he joined the National Action Party (PAN) and the follow-
ing year was elected to the national Chamber of Deputies. Elected
governor of Guanajuato in 1995, he left the post in 1998 to focus on his
national campaign. As president he sought to improve relations with the
United States and calm civil unrest in such areas as Chiapas and Tabasco.
television broadcasting company.
Founded in 1986 by RUPERT MURDOCH, it began with 79 affiliated stations
that reached 80% of U.S. homes. The network gradually expanded its
broadcast hours to seven nights a week and gained more affiliates to make
it available across the U.S. Concentrating on shows that appealed to afflu-
ent young viewers, it added programming divisions for children, sports,
and news in the 1990s.
fox terrier Well-known breed of dog developed in England to drive
foxes from their dens. The wire-
haired variety was developed from a
rough-coated black-and-tan TERRIER;
the smooth-haired variety was devel-
Fox Broadcasting Co. U.S.
oped from the BEAGLE, GREYHOUND, BULL
SALLY ANNE THOMPSON/EB INC.
Wirehaired fox terrier
Foxglove (Digitalis)
DEREK FELL
Foxx, Jimmie orig. James Emory Foxx (b. Oct. 22, 1907,
Foyt, A(nthony) J(oseph), Jr.
Fracastoro
active life was passed during the Neoclassical period, he continued to
paint in a Rococo idiom until shortly before the French Revolution, when
he lost his patrons and livelihood.
Frame (Clutha), Janet (Paterson) (b. Aug. 28, 1924, Dunedin,
by JANE CAMPION.
frame of reference See REFERENCE FRAME
framed structure or frame structure Structure supported mainly
WAR; FRENCH EQUATORIAL AFRICA; FRENCH WEST AFRICA). In 1981 France
France
Francesca, Piero della See PIERO DELLA FRANCESCA
Francesco di Cristofano de Giudicis See FRANCIABIGIO
Franche-Comté
Franck
Francis Joseph German Franz Josef (b. Aug. 18, 1830, Schloss
Schönbrunn, near Vienna—d. Nov.
21, 1916, Schloss Schönbrunn)
Emperor of Austria (1848–1916) and
king of Hungary (1867–1916). He
became emperor during the REVOLU-
TIONS OF 1848 after the abdication of
his uncle, FERDINAND I. With his prime
minister, Felix, prince zu SCHWARZEN-
BERG, he achieved a powerful position
for Austria,
in particular with the
Punctation of OLMÜTZ convention in
1850. His harsh, absolutist
within Austria produced a strong
central government but also led to
rioting and an assassination attempt.
Following Austria’s defeat by Prus-
sia in the SEVEN WEEKS’ WAR (1866),
he responded to Hungarian national
unrest by accepting the COMPROMISE
OF 1867. He adhered to the THREE
EMPERORS’ LEAGUE and formed an alli-
ance with Prussian-led Germany that
led to the TRIPLE ALLIANCE (1882). In
1898 his wife was assassinated, and in 1889 his son RUDOLF, his heir
apparent, died in a suicide love pact. In 1914 his ultimatum to Serbia fol-
lowing the murder of the next heir presumptive, FRANCIS FERDINAND, led
Austria and Germany into WORLD WAR I.
Francis of Assisi, Saint orig. Francesco di Pietro di Bernar-
frangipani
Franklin, Rosalind (Elsie) (b.
July 25, 1920, London, Eng.—d.
April 16, 1958, London) British
biologist. After graduating from the
University of Cambridge, she con-
ducted important experimental work
for the coal and coke industries. She
later produced the X-ray diffraction
pictures that allowed JAMES D. WATSON and FRANCIS CRICK to deduce that
the three-dimensional form of DNA was a double helix. In studies of the
tobacco mosaic virus, she helped show that its RNA is located in its pro-
tein rather than in its central cavity and that this RNA is a single-stranded
helix rather than the double helix found in the DNA of bacterial viruses
and higher organisms. Her death from cancer at age 37 probably cost her
a share of the 1962 Nobel Prize awarded to Watson, Crick, and MAURICE
WILKINS.
Franz
Frankfurter, Felix (b. Nov. 15, 1882, Vienna, Austria-Hungary—d.
Feb. 22, 1965, Washington, D.C.,
U.S.) Austrian-born U.S. jurist and
public official. Immigrating to the
U.S. at the age of 12, he was edu-
cated at the City College of New
York and Harvard Law School,
where he later taught (1914–39). He
served as secretary of war (1911–13)
under Pres. WILLIAM H. TAFT. He
advised WOODROW WILSON at
PARIS PEACE CONFERENCE (1919) and
counseled FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT on NEW
DEAL legislation (1933–39). He pro-
moted ZIONISM in the U.S. and helped
found the AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
friend LOUIS BRANDEIS
UNION; his
secretly encouraged his attacks on
the SACCO-VANZETTI conviction.
1939 he was appointed by Roosevelt
to the SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED
Fraser
asserted his leadership. He seized parts of Silesia during the War of the AUS-
TRIAN SUCCESSION, strengthening Prussia considerably. He invaded Saxony in
1756 and marched on into Bohemia. Frederick was almost defeated in the
SEVEN YEARS’ WAR (1756–63), until his admirer PETER III signed a Russo-
Prussian peace treaty that lasted until 1780. The First Partition of POLAND in
1772 led to enormous territorial gains for Prussia. Austro-Prussian rivalry
led to the War of the BAVARIAN SUCCESSION (1778–79), a diplomatic victory
for Frederick, but continued fear of Habsburg ambitions led him to form a
league of German states against JOSEPH II. Under Frederick’s leadership
Prussia became one of the great states of Europe, with vastly expanded ter-
ritories and impressive military strength. In addition to modernizing the
army, Frederick also espoused the ideas of enlightened despotism and insti-
tuted numerous economic, civil, and social reforms.
Frederick III German Friedrich (b. Sept. 21, 1415, Innsbruck,
Austria—d. Aug. 19, 1493, Linz) Holy Roman emperor from 1452 and
king of Germany (as Frederick IV) from 1440. By 1439 he was the senior
member of the HABSBURG DYNASTY, and he united the Austrian holdings of
two rival branches of the dynasty (partitioned in 1379), helping to lay the
foundations for the greatness of the house of Habsburg in European
affairs. His greatest achievement was marrying his son Maximilian (later
MAXIMILIAN I) to Mary, daughter of CHARLES THE BOLD, which gave the house
of Habsburg a large part of Burgundy and made the Austrians a European
power. Frederick was the last emperor to be crowned in Rome by a pope.
Frederick V German Friedrich known as Frederick the Winter
King (b. Aug. 26, 1596, Amberg, Upper Palatinate—d. Nov. 29, 1632,
Mainz) Elector palatine of the Rhine (1610–23) and king of Bohemia (as
Frederick I) for one winter (1619–20). The Protestant Bohemian estates
revolted against the Catholic emperor FERDINAND II and offered the crown
to Frederick (1619), making him head of the Protestant union against
Catholic Austria at the beginning of the THIRTY YEARS’ WAR. He was soon
abandoned by his allies and was routed in the Battle of WHITE MOUNTAIN.
In 1622 he went into exile in Holland. In 1623 he was deprived of his
rights as an elector, and in 1628 the Upper Palatinate was annexed by
Bavaria.
Frederick VII Danish Frederik
708 I
free-enterprise system (cid:2) freedom of speech
free-enterprise system See CAPITALISM
NEWTON’S LAWS OF MOTION.
free-market economy See CAPITALISM
REPUBLICAN PARTY.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
freesia
Frémont
three persons and for singular and plural; though spelled differently, sev-
eral of these forms are pronounced identically.
French Polynesia formerly French Oceania
frequency modulation See FM
fresco painting Method of wall painting in which water-based pig-
ments are applied to wet, freshly laid lime plaster. The dry-powder
colours, when mixed with water, penetrate the surface and become a per-
manent part of the wall. This technique is also known as buon fresco, or
“true fresco,” to distinguish it from fresco secco, or “dry fresco” (paint-
ing on dry plaster). Early Minoan, Greek, and Roman wall paintings were
frescoes. The Italian Renaissance was the greatest period of fresco paint-
ing, as seen in the works of CIMABUE, GIOTTO, MASACCIO, Fra ANGELICO,
CORREGGIO, and others. MICHELANGELO’s frescoes in the Sistine Chapel and
RAPHAEL’s in the Vatican are the most famous of all. By the 18th century,
fresco had been largely replaced by oil painting. In the early 20th cen-
tury it was revived by DIEGO RIVERA and others, often as a medium for
political art. Fresco painting is also found in China and India.
Frescobaldi
Friedan
ally gave way to CRUISER. In World War II, Britain revived the term frigate
to describe escort ships equipped with SONAR and DEPTH CHARGEs and used
to guard convoys from submarines. In the postwar decades frigates also
adopted an antiaircraft role, adding RADAR and surface-to-air missiles.
Modern frigates may displace more than 3,000 tons (2,700 metric tons),
sail at a speed of 30 knots, and carry a crew of 200.
Frigg
wings. Many of the smaller fritillar-
ies are members of the genus Bolo-
ria. Many fritillary larvae
nocturnal and feed on violet leaves.
Friuli–Venezia Giulia
Front Islamique du Salut (FIS) See ISLAMIC SALVATION FRONT
Frontenac
COTS, BANANAS, and GRAPES, as well as BEAN pods, CORN grains, TOMATOES,
the MEDITERRANEAN FRUIT FLY and the
Frunze
ment of the pistons (see PISTON AND CYLINDER). On DIESEL ENGINES, which lack
SPARK PLUGS, the heat created by compressing air in the cylinders ignites the
fuel, which has been pumped in as a spray. In engines with spark igni-
tion, fuel-injection pumps are often used instead of conventional CARBU-
RETORS. Fuel injection distributes the fuel more evenly to the cylinders than
does a carburetor; more power can be developed and undesirable emis-
sions are reduced. In engines with continuous combustion, such as gas
TURBINES and liquid-fueled ROCKETS, which have no pistons to create suction,
fuel-injection systems are necessary.
Fuentes
Fulani
fulmar
PENTECOSTALISM.
fundamentalism, Islamic Conservative religious movement that
seeks a return to Islamic values and Islamic law (see SHARIA) in the face
of Western modernism, which is seen as corrupt and atheistic. Though
popularly associated in the West with Middle Eastern terrorists, only a
few Islamic fundamentalists are terrorists, and not all Arab terrorists are
fundamentalists. The Iranian revolution of 1979 established an Islamic
fundamentalist state, and the TALIBAN has established its version of the same
in much of Afghanistan. Islamic fundamentalist movements have varying
degrees of support in North Africa, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Muslim
S.East Asia, but Islamic fundamentalism represents a minority viewpoint
in the context of world Islam.
Fundy, Bay of Inlet of the Atlantic Ocean, southeastern Canada
Located between the provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, it
extends 94 mi (151 km) inland and is 32 mi (52 km) wide at its entrance.
It is noted for its fast-running tides, which may produce rises as great as
70 ft (21 m), the highest in the world. Noted also for the spectacular rock
formations and forests of its shorelines, it has several deepwater harbours,
including one at ST. JOHN, N.B. In 1948 a 51,000-acre (20,700-hectare)
section of the bay’s New Brunswick coast was set aside as Fundy National
Park.
Funen Danish Fyn
architects designed chairs made of modern materials such as tubular steel
and plastic. See also BENTWOOD FURNITURE; EARLY AMERICAN FURNITURE; SHAKER
FURNITURE.
Furtwängler
tems to detect and adapt to patterns of water movement during a wash
cycle, increasing efficiency and reducing water consumption. Other prod-
ucts using fuzzy logic include camcorders, microwave ovens, and dish-
washers. Other applications
include EXPERT
self-regulating
industrial
controls,
and computerized speech-
and handwriting-
recognition programs.
SYSTEMS,
Fw 190 See FOCKE-WULF 190
Fyodor
G. intestinalis See GIARDIA LAMBLIA
Gabar
Gaborone
Gafencu
galactic nucleus See ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEUS
galactose
Galerius
England and France, where he learned the sign method of communica-
tion. In 1816 he established the school for the deaf in Hartford, Conn.;
for more than 50 years it would remain the main American training cen-
tre for instructors of the deaf. GALLAUDET UNIVERSITY in Washington, D.C.,
is named in his honour.
Gallaudet
ous combinations with ALUMINUM, INDIUM, PHOSPHORUS, ARSENIC, and ANTIMONY,
it forms compounds (e.g., gallium arsenide and indium gallium arsenide
phosphide) with valuable SEMICONDUCTOR and optoelectronic properties;
some of these compounds form the basis for such electronic devices as
LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES and semiconductor LASERS.
Galsworthy
Gálvez
The largest island, Mangareva, is 5 mi (8 km) long and encircled by a
barrier reef 40 mi (64 km) in circumference. Mangareva rises to about
1,444 ft (440 m) in the peaks Duff and Mokoto; the chief village, Rikitea,
is on Mangareva’s eastern side. The Gambier Islands were annexed by
the French in 1881. Their economy is based on subsistence agriculture;
pearl harvesting is also of economic importance.
gambling Betting or staking of something of value on the outcome of
a game or event. Commonly associated with gambling are HORSE RACING,
BOXING, numerous playing-card and DICE games, COCKFIGHTING, JAI ALAI, rec-
reational BILLIARDS and DARTS, BINGO, and LOTTER Y. In most gambling games it
is customary to express the idea of probability in terms of “odds against
winning.” In the U.S. casino gambling, once highly restricted, is now legal
in many states, and lotteries are employed by many states to raise rev-
enues. The Internet has also become a venue for placing bets. See also
BOOKMAKING; CASINO.
solution. See also DECISION THEOR Y; PRISONER’S DILEMMA.
gamelan
also CENTRAL ASIAN ARTS; KUSHAN ART.
Gandhi
Ganga
in France and later became a French citizen. He was awarded the Nobel
Prize for Literature in 2000.
Gaozu
Garfunkel, Art See Paul SIMON
Gargano
Garnier
Garland City
Garland, Judy orig. Frances
Garuda
SOCIETY.
SLAVER Y
NEBRASKA ACT, and the DRED SCOTT DECISION and hailed JOHN BROWN’s raid.
Garter, (The Most Noble) Order of the English order of knight-
hood founded by EDWARD III in 1348 and considered the highest British
honor. Legend holds that it was created after an incident in which Edward
Gascony
gastritis
Gaudí
Gay, John (b. June 30, 1685, Barnstaple, Devon, Eng.—d. Dec. 4, 1732,
London) British poet and dramatist.
From an ancient but impoverished
Devonshire family, Gay was appren-
ticed to a silk mercer in London but
released
early. He
cofounded the journal The British
Apollo. His
poetry
collections
included Rural Sports (1713) and
Trivia (1716). He is best known for
the BALLAD OPERA The Beggar’s Opera
(1728), which ran for 62 perfor-
mances (the longest run to that date).
The play, with music by John C. Pep-
usch (1667–1752), was a cynical tale
of thieves and highwaymen intended
to mirror the moral degradation of
society; its success made it a land-
mark in music-theatre history. It was
adapted by BERTOLT BRECHT and KURT
WEILL as The Threepenny Opera
(1928). Gay was buried in Westmin-
ster Abbey.
Gay-Lussac
GE See GENERAL ELECTRIC CO.
Ge Hong
by such huge successes as Horton Hatches the Egg (1940), The Cat in
the Hat (1957), How the Grinch Stole Christmas (1957), Yertle the Turtle
(1958), and Green Eggs and Ham (1960). Such perennial best-sellers, and
his posthumous Oh, the Places You’ll Go! (1993), made him the best-
selling children’s author in the world.
Geiger counter or Geiger-Müller counter Device used for
geisha
rupted. See also GENETIC ENGINEERING, GENETICS, HARDY-WEINBERG LAW, HUMAN
GENOME PROJECT, LINKAGE GROUP.
gene therapy or gene transfer therapy Introduction of a nor-
gender gap (cid:2) General Mills
breast and other cancers, and diabetes. Some aspects of gene therapy,
including genetic manipulation and selection, research on embryonic tis-
sue, and experimentation on human subjects, have aroused ethical con-
troversy.
genealogy Study of family origins and history. It is found in most parts
of the world and is international in scope. Originally concerned with trac-
ing royal, aristocratic, or clerical lines, genealogy has broadened its scope
over the centuries, and many ordinary people now pursue it as a hobby.
In preliterate cultures genealogical information was transmitted orally,
usually as a list of names; later generations recorded this information.
Divine origins were often ascribed to kings and heroes. Modern genealo-
gists use artifacts, including ancient records, coins, deeds, tapestries,
paintings, and monuments, to help them in their work.
Genée, Dame Adeline orig. Anina Margarete Kirstina Petra
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) Set of mul-
by PHILIP MORRIS COMPANIES INC.
Several traditional gemstone cuts
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
General Telephone and Electronics Corp. See GTE CORP.
generative grammar
made possible the RECOMBINATION techniques of GENETIC ENGINEERING. An
understanding of genetics is necessary for the diagnosis, prevention, and
treatment of hereditary diseases, the breeding of plants and animals, and
the development of industrial processes that use microorganisms. See also
BEHAVIOUR GENETICS.
Geneva
genocide
the system of BINOMIAL NOMENCLATURE.
geodesy
750 I geometry (cid:2) George III
Geologic Time
Periods and systems
Epochs and series
Beginning of interval*
Biological forms
Phanerozoic
Tertiary
Cenozoic
Quaternary
Holocene
Pleistocene
Pliocene
Miocene
Oligocene
Eocene
Paleocene
Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary (65 million years ago): extinction of dinosaurs
Mesozoic
Cretaceous
Early
Paleozoic
Jurassic
Triassic
Permian
Carboniferous
Pennsylvanian
Mississippian
Devonian
Silurian
Ordovician
Cambrian
Proterozoic
Archean
Precambrian
*In millions of years before the present.
geometry See ALGEBRAIC GEOMETR Y, ANALYTIC GEOMETR Y, DIFFERENTIAL GEOM-
ETR Y, ELLIPTIC GEOMETR Y, EUCLIDEAN GEOMETR Y, FRACTAL GEOMETR Y, HYPERBOLIC GEOM-
ETR Y, NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETR Y, PROJECTIVE GEOMETR Y
MARINE GEOPHYSICS.
George I orig. George Louis German Georg Ludwig (b. May
28, 1660, Osnabrück, Hanover—d. June 11, 1727, Osnabrück) First king
of England (1714–27) from the house of HANOVER. He succeeded his father
as the elector of Hanover (1698) and fought with distinction in the War
of the SPANISH SUCCESSION. As a great-grandson of JAMES I of England and
under the Act of SETTLEMENT, George ascended the English throne in 1714.
He formed a Whig ministry and left internal politics to his ministers,
including 1ST EARL STANHOPE, VISCOUNT TOWNSHEND, and ROBERT WALPOLE. He
was unpopular because of his German manner and German mistresses and
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
2,500
4,000
Earliest humans
Earliest hominids
Earliest grasses
Earliest large mammals
Earliest flowering plants; dinosaurs in ascendance
Earliest birds and mammals
Age of Dinosaurs begins
Earliest reptiles
Earliest winged insects
Earliest vascular plants (incl. ferns and mosses)
and amphibians
Earliest land plants and insects
Earliest corals
Earliest fishes
Earliest colonial algae and soft-bodied invertebrates
Life appears; earliest algae and primitive bacteria
their involvement in the SOUTH SEA BUBBLE crisis, but he strengthened Brit-
ain’s position by forming the QUADRUPLE ALLIANCE (1718). He was suc-
ceeded by his son, GEORGE II.
George I Greek Georgios orig. Prince William of Denmark
(b. Dec. 24, 1845, Copenhagen, Den.—d. March 18, 1913, Salonika,
Greece) King of Greece. Son of CHRISTIAN IX of Denmark, he served in the
Danish navy and in 1862 was nominated to the Greek throne by Britain,
France, and Russia after the Greek king, Otto, was deposed. Accepted by
the Greek National Assembly, he ascended the throne as George I in 1863.
He oversaw the incorporation of territory in Thessaly and Epirus into
Greece as well as the annexation of Crete. In the unrest caused by the
BALKAN WARS, he was assassinated at Salonika; he was succeeded by his
son, Constantine I. His long reign was the formative period for the devel-
opment of Greece as a modern European state.
George II orig. George Augustus German Georg August (b.
YEARS’ WAR.
George III orig. George William Frederick (b. June 4, 1738,
London, Eng.—d. Jan. 29, 1820, Windsor Castle, near London) King of
Great Britain and Ireland (1760–1820); also elector (1760–1814) and king
(1814–20) of Hanover. The grandson of GEORGE II, he ascended the throne
during the SEVEN YEARS’ WAR. His chief minister, Lord BUTE, forced WIL-
George
George IV orig. George Augustus Frederick (b. Aug. 12, 1762,
London, Eng.—d. June 26, 1830, Windsor, Berkshire) King of the United
Kingdom (1820–30) and king of Hanover (1820–30). The son of GEORGE
III, he earned his father’s ill will by his extravagances and dissolute hab-
its, contracting a secret marriage that was annulled by his father. In 1811
George became regent for his father, who had been declared insane.
Retaining his father’s ministers rather than appointing his Whig friends,
he saw Britain and its allies triumph over Napoleon in 1815. A patron of
the architect JOHN NASH, he sponsored the restoration of WINDSOR CASTLE.
George V orig. George Frederick Ernest Albert (b. June 3,
George VI orig. Albert Frederick Arthur George (b. Dec. 14,
1895,
Sandringham,
Norfolk,
Eng.—d. Feb. 6, 1952, Sandring-
ham) King of the United Kingdom
(1936–52). The
second son of
GEORGE V, he was proclaimed king
following the abdication of his
brother, EDWARD VIII. He was an
important symbolic leader of the
British people during World War II,
supporting the wartime leadership of
WINSTON CHURCHILL and visiting his
armies on several battlefronts. In
1949 he was formally recognized as
head of the COMMONWEALTH by its
member states. He earned the respect
of his people by scrupulously
observing the responsibilities of a
constitutional monarch and by over-
coming the handicap of a severe stammer. He was succeeded by his
daughter, ELIZABETH II.
George, David Lloyd See David LLOYD GEORGE
752 I Georgia (cid:2) geosyncline
Georgia Country, Transcaucasia, western Asia. Located within the CAU-
CASUS MOUNTAINS, on the southeastern shores of the Black Sea, it includes
the autonomous republics of Abkhazia and Ajaria (Adjara). Area: 27,086 sq
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Georgia Institute of Technology known as Georgia Tech Pub-
igneous rock and regional uplift complete the transformation into a belt
of folded mountains. The concept was introduced by JAMES HALL in 1859
and is basic to the theory of mountain building. See also ANDEAN GEO-
SYNCLINE; APPALACHIAN GEOSYNCLINE; CORDILLERAN GEOSYNCLINE.
gerbil
tral and southern highlands of Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, is now
standard written German, used in administration, higher education, litera-
ture, and the mass media in both High and Low German speech areas.
German measles See RUBELLA
German National People’s Party (DNVP) (1919–33) Radical
German-Soviet Nonaggres-
sion Pact or Nazi-Soviet Non-
Germanic
Germany were united, while the Soviet zone became East GERMANY. It
became a sovereign country and a member of NATO in 1955, though its
occupiers retained military bases. It united with SAARLAND in 1957, and it
joined the UN in 1973. It was reunited with East Germany in October 1990.
germination Sprouting of a SEED, SPORE, or other reproductive body,
usually after a period of dormancy. Absorption of water, passage of time,
chilling, warming, oxygen availability, and light exposure may all oper-
ate in initiating the germination process. The carefully controlled mass
germination of cereal seeds supplies enzymes for the making of alcoholic
beverages and for other industries; spores of the commercially cultivated
mushroom Agaricus brunescens are also mass germinated.
Gérôme
PEAN COAL AND STEEL COMMUNITY, the forerunner of the EUROPEAN UNION. The
Former republic (1949–90), west-central Europe. It consisted of the west-
ern two-thirds of what is now the Federal Republic of GERMANY. It was
formed in 1949 when the U.S., British, and French zones of occupation in
Gerry
Gethsemane
tury the Mande founded the states of Dag-
omba and Mamprussi in the northern half
of the region. The ASANTE (Ashanti), an
Akan people, originated in the central for-
est region and formed a strongly central-
ized empire that was at its height in the 18th–19th century. European
exploration of the region began early in the 15th century, when the Por-
tuguese landed on the Gold Coast; they later established a settlement at
Elmina as headquarters for the SLAVE TRADE. By the mid-18th century the
Gold Coast was dominated by numerous forts controlled by Dutch, Brit-
ish, and Danish merchants. Britain made the Gold Coast a crown colony
in 1874, and British protectorates over the Asante and the northern ter-
ritories were established in 1901. In 1957 the Gold Coast became the
independent state of Ghana. Since independence several political coups
have occurred, but the coup of 1981 produced a government that lasted
into the 1990s and made a smooth transition into another administration
at the beginning of the 21st century.
Ghana empire First of the great medieval trading empires of western
Africa (7th–13th century). Located in what is now southeastern Mauri-
tania and part of Mali, it acted as intermediary between Arab and BERBER
salt traders to the north and gold and ivory producers to the south. Gold
was secured through barter from those living at the empire’s southern limit
and exchanged in the capital for commodities, especially salt. As the
empire grew richer it extended its reach, incorporating gold-producing
southern lands and cities to the north. The king exacted tribute from the
princes of subject tribes. Ghana began to decline with the rise of the Mus-
lim ALMORAVIDs; the Almoravid leader ABU BAKR seized the Ghanaian capi-
tal of Kumbi in 1076. The empire’s subject peoples began to break away,
and in 1240 the empire’s remains were incorporated into the SUNDIATA
empire of Mali.
Ghannouchi
between the Calvinist north (the Union of Utrecht) and the Catholic south
(the Union of Arras). The general union ended in 1584.
Gheorghiu-Dej
giant See GIGANTISM
giant order See COLOSSAL ORDER
giant sequoia See BIG TREE
giant silkworm moth See SATURNIID MOTH
giant star Star with a relatively large radius for its mass and tempera-
ture; this yields a large radiating area, so such stars are bright. Subclasses
include SUPERGIANT STARs, red giants (with low temperatures, but very
bright), and subgiants (with slightly reduced radii and brightness). Some
giants are hundreds of thousands of times brighter than the Sun. Giants
and supergiants may have masses 10–30 times that of the Sun and vol-
umes millions of times greater and are thus low-density stars.
Giap, Vo Nguyen See VO NGUYEN GIAP
Giardia lamblia
of sheer, inaccessible cliffs, which makes it strategically important. It is
the site of a British air and naval base that guards the Strait of GIBRALTAR.
The Moors held Gibraltar from 711 to 1462, and in 1501 it was annexed
by Spain. Captured by the British in 1704, it became a British crown
colony in 1830. Gibraltar was an important port in World Wars I and II.
The sovereignty of the territory has remained a source of constant fric-
tion between the United Kingdom and Spain, though residents voted in
1967 to remain part of Britain. Spain lifted its border blockade in the
mid-1980s. Perhaps its most famous residents are the Barbary macaques,
who occupy many of Gibraltar’s caves and are Europe’s only free-living
monkeys.
Gibraltar, Strait of ancient Fretum Herculeum Channel, con-
Gibran
from the booty and led Israel into immorality. In another version, he
replaced worship of the local deity, BAAL, with that of Yahweh (the God
of Israel), and the power of Yahweh enabled his tribe to destroy the Mid-
ianites.
Gielgud
Gilchrist
Ginsburg, Ruth Bader orig. Ruth Joan Bader (b. March 15,
ginseng
notably the monumental altarpiece The Presentation of Christ in the
Temple (1447–49), 12 scenes from the life of St. John the Baptist, and a
Madonna (1463) altarpiece in Pienza Cathedral. He also painted count-
less other religious panels. His tormented spirituality and expressionistic
style were little appreciated until his reputation was revived in the 20th
century.
Gippsland
Gislebertus
gladiolus
glass, decorative See AMELUNG GLASS, BACCARAT GLASS, BOHEMIAN GLASS,
CAMEO GLASS, CUT GLASS, LUSTERED GLASS, STAINED GLASS, VENETIAN GLASS, WATER-
FORD GLASS
glaucoma
globulin
also HANG GLIDING.
FIREFLIES. Glow-
gloxinia
attached to different carbon atoms. The term is often used for the simplest
of the class, ETHYLENE GLYCOL (1,2-ethanediol). Propylene glycol (1,2-
propanediol), much like ethylene glycol but not toxic, is used extensively
in foods, cosmetics, and oral hygiene products as a solvent, preservative,
and moisture-retaining agent. Other important glycols include 1,3-
butanediol and 1,4-butanediol, used as raw materials for plastics and other
chemicals; 2-ethyl-1,3-hexanediol, an insect repellent; and 2-methyl-2-
propyl-1,3-propanediol, the raw material of the tranquilizer meprobamate.
glycolysis
Go-Daigo
Godden, Rumer in full Margaret Rumer Godden Haynes-
Gödel
1, 1945, Berlin) German Nazi leader. After earning a doctorate from
Heidelberg University, he joined the NAZI PARTY and was appointed district
leader in Berlin by ADOLF HITLER in 1926. A gifted speaker, Goebbels also
edited the party’s journal and began to create the Führer myth around Hit-
ler, instituting the party demonstrations that helped convert the masses to
Nazism. After Hitler seized power in 1933, Goebbels took control of the
national propaganda machinery. During World War II he carried on a per-
sonal propaganda blitz to raise hopes on the home front. Named chancellor
in Hitler’s will, he remained with Hitler to the end. One day after Hitler’s
suicide, Goebbels and his wife killed themselves and their six children.
Goerdeler
goitre Enlargement of the THYROID GLAND, causing a prominent swelling
at the throat. The thyroid can grow to 50 times its normal weight, inter-
fere with breathing and swallowing, and cause a choking feeling. Simple
(endemic) goitre, the most common, is due to low IODINE intake. It and
related conditions result from various defects in thyroid hormone synthe-
sis (hypothyroidism). Advanced cases are treated with thyroid hormone
or surgical removal of the thyroid if it obstructs breathing. The cause of
sporadic goitre, which occurs in areas where iodine intake is more than
adequate, remains a mystery. An enlarged thyroid may have normally
functioning tissue or may produce too much hormone (hyperthyroidism).
See also GRAVES DISEASE.
Golan
776 I Golden Horde (cid:2) Goldmark
Golden Gate Bridge, San Francisco.
GEORGE HALL/WOODFIN CAMP AND ASSOCIATES
golden lion tamarin or golden lion marmoset Species of TAM-
ARIN (Leontideus rosalia), having a thick, lionlike mane, black face, and
long, silky, golden fur. A striking-looking animal, it is found in South
America, where it is listed as critically endangered.
golden ratio/rectangle/section Numerical proportion considered
to be an aesthetic ideal in classical design. It refers to the ratio of the base
to the height of a rectangle or to the division of a line segment into two
in such a way that the ratio of the shorter part to the longer is equal to
that of the longer to the whole. It works out to about 1.61803:1. A rect-
angle constructed from golden sections (segments in this ratio) is called
a golden rectangle.
Golden Temple Punjabi Darbar Sahib or Harimandir Chief
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis).
KITTY KOHOUT/ROOT RESOURCES
Goldfish (Carassius auratus)
W.S. PITT—ERIC HOSKING
Golding, Sir William (Gerald) (b. Sept. 19, 1911, St. Columb
golem
Goldwyn, Samuel orig. Schmuel Gelbfisz later Samuel
Burana is a collection of 13th-century Latin goliard poems and songs;
some were translated by JOHN ADDINGTON SYMONDS as Wine, Women, and
Song (1884), and some were set in a famous cantata by CARL ORFF (1937).
In the 14th century the term came to mean JONGLEUR, or MINSTREL.
Golitsyn, Vasily (Vasilyevich), Prince (b. 1643, Russia—d. May
2, 1714, Kholmogory, Russia) Russian statesman and chief adviser to
SOPHIA Alekseyevna. After commanding in the Ukraine, he served in the
court of FYODOR III and reorganized the Russian army. When Sophia became
regent in 1682, she appointed her lover Golitsyn head of the foreign office.
He negotiated an alliance with Poland (1686) against the Ottoman Turks
but failed in his two campaigns against the Turks (1687, 1689). He also
concluded the Treaty of NERCHINSK with China. In 1689 he was exiled to
Siberia after a coup displaced Sophia and placed PETER I on the throne.
Golitsyn family
landmass, PANGEA, which supposedly began to separate late in the TRIASSIC
PERIOD. Subsequent workers distinguished between a southern landmass,
Gondwana, and LAURASIA to the north. See also CONTINENTAL DRIFT.
Góngora
ern breeding grounds and southern wintering grounds. See also BARNACLE
GOOSE; CANADA GOOSE; GREYLAG; NENE.
GOP See REPUBLICAN PARTY
gopher or pocket gopher Any
of about 40 species (family Geomy-
idae) of stocky RODENTs found in
North and Central America. Gophers
range in length from 5 to 18 in. (13
to 45 cm), including a short, sparsely
haired tail. They have chisel-like
front teeth; long, strong claws on
their forefeet; and large fur-lined
pouches that open externally on each
side of the mouth. Coat colour varies
from almost white to brown or black.
Gophers live alone in extensive,
shallow
underground
burrows
marked by a series of rounded earth
mounds on the surface. They feed on the underground parts of plants,
which they obtain as they tunnel along.
Gorbachev
1779 he organized the Protestant associations formed to secure the repeal
of the Catholic Relief Act (1778). In 1780 he led a mob to Parliament to
present a petition against the act. The ensuing riot lasted a week, causing
great property damage and nearly 500 casualties. Gordon was charged
with, but was acquitted of, high treason. Convicted of libeling the queen
of France in 1787, he was imprisoned in Newgate, where he died.
Gordy, Berry, Jr. See MOTOWN
Gore, Al in full Albert Arnold Gore, Jr. (b. March 31, 1948, Wash-
Gorée
Gorki See NIZHNIY NOVGOROD
Gorky, Arshile orig. Vosdanik Adoian (b. April 15, 1904,
SIONISM.
Gorky, Maksim orig. Aleksey Maksimovich Peshkov (b.
Gorsky, Aleksandr (Alexeyevich) (b. Aug. 18, 1871, St. Peters-
Gortyn
Gosse
Göttingen
Gourmont
Graaff, Robert Van de See Robert J. VAN DE GRAAFF
Grable, Betty orig. Ruth Elizabeth Grable (b. Dec. 18, 1916, St.
Gracchus
gelistic Association in Minneapolis, Minn., and he enjoyed close asso-
ciations with a series of U.S. presidents. Graham and his wife, Ruth, were
awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in 1996.
Graham
gramadevata
Grand Guignol
Trunk eventually became the main rail system of Quebec and Ontario. It
merged with the Great Western Railway (1882) and became part of the
CANADIAN NATIONAL RAILWAYS (1919–23).
grand unified theory or grand unification theory (GUT)
Theory that attempts to unify the electroweak force (see ELECTROWEAK
ACTIONS is sometimes called UNIFIED FIELD THEOR Y. Such theories generally
predict that a PROTON decays into lighter particles. So far, no successful
GUTs have been devised.
Grande, Río See RIO GRANDE
grande école
BATTLE OF CHATTANOOGA in 1864, he
granulite facies
computers many of the same capabilities as the Macintosh. In addition to
being used for operating-system interfaces, GUIs are used in other types
of software, including BROWSERS and application programs.
graphite or plumbago
Graves disease or toxic diffuse goitre or exophthalmic
794 I great auk (cid:2) Great Game
Great Dismal Swamp See DISMAL SWAMP
Great Dividing Range Main watershed of eastern Australia. It com-
prises a series of plateaus and mountain ranges roughly paralleling the
coasts of QUEENSLAND, NEW SOUTH WALES, and VICTORIA, Austl. Beginning
in the north on the Cape York Peninsula, Queen., the range heads south
to become the AUSTRALIAN ALPS near the New South Wales–Victoria border.
Bending west in Victoria, the range ends in the GRAMPIANS, while a south-
ern spur emerges from the BASS STRAIT to form the central uplands of TAS-
MANIA. The range stretches for 2,300 mi (3,700 km). First traversed in 1813
by Europeans moving into the Australian Outback, the region is now
important for agriculture, lumbering, and mining, and national parks
attract tourists.
Great Fear (1789) In the FRENCH REVOLUTION, a period of panic and riot by
peasants and others amid rumors of an “aristocratic conspiracy” by the king
and the privileged to overthrow the THIRD ESTATE. The gathering of troops
around Paris provoked insurrection, and on July 14 the Parisian rabble
seized the BASTILLE. In the provinces the peasants rose against their lords,
attacking châteaux and destroying feudal documents. To check the peas-
ants, the National Constituent Assembly decreed the abolition of the feudal
regime and introduced the DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS OF MAN AND OF THE CITI-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Great Indian Desert See THAR DESERT
TANGANYIKA, and MALAWI.
Great Lakes trout See LAKE TROUT
Great Leap Forward Failed industrialization campaign undertaken
by the Chinese Communists between 1958 and early 1960. MAO ZEDONG
hoped to develop labor-intensive methods of industrialization that would
emphasize manpower rather than the gradual purchase of heavy machinery,
thereby putting to use China’s dense population and obviating the need to
accumulate capital. Rather than large new factories, he proposed develop-
ing backyard steel furnaces in every village. Rural people were organized
into communes where agricultural and political decisions emphasized
ideological purity rather than expertise. The program was implemented so
hastily and zealously that many errors occurred; these were exacerbated by
a series of natural disasters and the withdrawal of Soviet technical person-
nel. China’s agriculture was so disrupted that about 20 million people died
of starvation from 1958 to 1962. By early 1960 the government began to
repeal the Great Leap Forward; private plots were returned to peasants and
expertise began to be emphasized again.
Great Mosque See MASJID-I-JAMI
Great Mosque of
EÆfah)n Persian Masjed-e J)mi!
TAGE SITE in 1983.
1964; MEDICARE AND MEDICAID.
Great Trek Emigration of some 12,000–14,000 Boers (see AFRIKANERs)
from Cape Colony (South Africa) between 1835 and the early 1840s, in
rebellion against British policies and in search of fresh pasturelands. The
trek, regarded by Afrikaners as the origin of their nationhood, enabled the
settlers to establish temporary military supremacy over the XHOSA, to pen-
etrate into Natal and the Highveld, and to expand white settlement north
to the Limpopo River. See also ANDRIES PRETORIUS.
Great Victoria Desert Arid region, WESTERN AUSTRALIA and SOUTH AUS-
TRALIA. Lying between GIBSON DESERT on the north and NULLARBOR PLAIN on
the south, it extends east from Kalgoorlie almost to the Stuart Range.
Much of its eastern end is occupied by the Central and North West
Aboriginal reserves. A vast expanse of sand hills, it is crossed by the
Laverton–Warburton Mission Track, which links the mission station in
the Warburton Range with Laverton, 350 mi (560 km) southwest. There
are several national parks and reserves in the area, including the Great
Victoria Desert Nature Reserve and the Nullarbor National Park.
Great Wall of China Chinese Wanli Changcheng
separate, and has produced such massifs as KILIMANJARO and Mount KENYA.
The system’s main branch, the Eastern Rift Valley, is occupied in the north
by the JORDAN RIVER, the DEAD SEA, and the Gulf of AQABA. It continues
south along the RED SEA to several lakes in Kenya. Less obvious in Tan-
zania, with its eastern rim eroded, it continues south to the Indian Ocean
near BEIRA, Mozam. The western branch of the system, the Western Rift
Valley, extends north from the northern end of Lake MALAWI in an arc that
includes lakes RUKWA, TANGANYIKA, KIVU, EDWARD, and ALBERT.
Great Saint Bernard Pass ancient Mons Jovis Pass in the ALPS.
Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve Natural area,
south-central Colorado, U.S. It lies at the eastern edge of the San Luis
Valley along the western base of the SANGRE DE CRISTO MOUNTAINS. Estab-
lished in 1932 as a national monument, the 150,000-acre (60,700-hectare)
region contains some of the highest inland sand dunes in the U.S., with
changing crests that rise to 700 ft (215 m). In 2000 the Great Sand Dunes
National Preserve was created, and after much land acquisition the monu-
ment officially became a national park in 2004.
Great Sandy Desert Wasteland, northern WESTERN AUSTRALIA. It
extends from Eighty Mile Beach on the Indian Ocean eastward into the
NORTHERN TERRITOR Y and from the Kimberley Downs south to the TROPIC OF
CAPRICORN and the GIBSON DESERT. An arid expanse of salt marshes and sand
hills, it roughly coincides with the sedimentary Canning basin. Canning
Stock Route (1,000 mi [1,600 km] long) spans the region from Wiluna
via Lake Disappointment to Halls Creek.
Great Schism See Western SCHISM
great sea otter See SEA OTTER
Great Smoky Mountains National Park National preserve,
eastern Tennessee and western North Carolina, U.S. It is 20 mi (32 km)
wide and extends southwest for 54 mi (87 km) from the Pigeon River to
the Little Tennessee River. Established in 1934 to preserve the U.S.’s last
remaining sizable area of southern primeval hardwood forest, it covers
520,269 acres (210,553 hectares) and contains some of the highest peaks
grebe (cid:2) Greek alphabet
Slavonian, or horned, grebe (Podiceps
auritus)
INGMAR HOLMASEN
Greco, El orig. Doménikos Theotokópoulos (b. 1541, Candia,
Greco-Persian Wars See PERSIAN WARS
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
798 I Greek Civil War (cid:2) Greek religion
letters, all capitals—ideal for monuments; various scripts better suited to
handwriting were later derived from it.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
GREEK RELIGION.
edited it for the rest of his life, becoming known especially for his articu-
lation of antislavery sentiments in the 1850s. After the onset of the Ameri-
can Civil War in 1861, he pursued a politically erratic course. His
unrealized lifelong ambitions for public office culminated in 1872 in an
unsuccessful run for president on the Liberal Republican Party ticket.
Green, Adolph See Betty COMDEN
Green, Hetty orig. Henrietta Howland Robinson (b. Nov. 21,
Green, Julian (Hartridge) or
Julien Green (b. Sept. 6, 1900,
Paris, France—d. Aug. 13, 1998,
Paris) French-born American writer.
Born in France of American parents,
Green lived mostly in France, though
he taught for a few years in the U.S.
Green’s novels are written in French
and are usually set in French provin-
cial towns or in the American South.
In the intense, claustrophobic atmo-
sphere of these novels, neurotic char-
acters engage in obsessive relationships marked by secrecy, guilt, betrayal,
sexual passion, and violence. In 1970 the Académie Française awarded
him its grand prize for literature in appreciation of his masterful French
prose style, which is marked by clarity, precision, and simplicity. Green’s
works were collected in Complete Works, 10 vol. (1954–65).
Green, William (b. March 3, 1873, Coshocton, Ohio, U.S.—d. Nov.
21, 1952, Coshocton) U.S. labour leader, president of the American Fed-
eration of Labor (AFL). He was a coal miner from age 16. He worked
his way up through the union hierarchy and was elected president of the
AFL in 1924, a post he kept until his death. The formation in 1935 of the
Committee for Industrial Organization (CIO), headed by JOHN L. LEWIS, led
to bitter public disputes between the two men, ending in the expulsion of
the CIO from the AFL in 1936. See also AFL-CIO; LABOUR UNION.
Green Bank equation See DRAKE EQUATION
Green Bay City (pop., 2000: 102,313), northeastern Wisconsin, U.S.
Located on the Fox River at Green Bay, an inlet of Lake MICHIGAN, it was
the site of French trading posts from 1634 until the WAR OF 1812. The
U.S. took possession when the army built Fort Howard there in 1816. With
the decline of the fur trade and the opening of the ERIE CANAL, it devel-
oped as a lumbering and agricultural centre. A GREAT LAKES port of entry
with heavy shipping, it has a large wholesale and distributing business.
The city is famous for its professional football team, the Green Bay Pack-
ers, which it has supported since 1919. It is the site of a University of
Wisconsin branch and a technical college.
Green Berets
Greek Revival Architectural style based on 5th-century-BC Greek
temples that spread throughout Europe and the U.S. in the early 19th cen-
tury. The revival was symptomatic of the public’s preoccupation with
Greek culture at the time. Architects often tacked majestic facades with
Grecian columns onto existing buildings; banks and institutions became
imitation Doric temples; and homes
in the Greek Revival style often had
large PORTICOes made up of heavy
PILASTERs and reinterpreted PEDIMENTs.
The BRITISH MUSEUM (1847), utilizing
the Greek Ionic order on a massive
scale, is the most powerful English
example of the style. In the U.S.,
where the style was adopted on a
large scale, many strange distortions
found acceptance. See also NEOCLAS-
SICAL ARCHITECTURE.
Greeley, Horace (b. Feb. 3,
800 I green revolution (cid:2) greenhouse
Greenaway, Kate orig. Catherine Greenaway (b. March 17,
Illustration for “When We Went Out
with Grandmamma” by Kate Green-
away for Marigold Garden, 1885.
MARY EVANS PICTURE LIBRARY, LONDON
also FREE SILVER MOVEMENT, POPULIST MOVEMENT.
ing HELEN FRANKENTHALER, MARK ROTHKO, and DAVID SMITH. He disavowed such
later movements as POP ART and CONCEPTUAL ART and wrote little after the
1960s.
Greenberg, Hank orig. Henry Benjamin Greenberg (b. Jan.1,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Greene, Charles Sumner and Henry Mather (respectively b.
GLOBAL WARMING.
greenhouse effect (cid:2) Greens
Some incoming sunlight is reflected by the Earth’s atmosphere and surface, but
most is absorbed by the surface, which is warmed. Infrared (IR) radiation is then
emitted from the surface. Some IR radiation escapes to space, but some is absorbed
by the atmosphere’s greenhouse gases (especially carbon dioxide, water vapour,
and methane) and reradiated in all directions, some to space and some back
toward the surface, where it further warms the surface and lower atmosphere.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
greenschist facies
Gregory XIII orig. Ugo Buoncompagni (b. June 7, 1502, Bolo-
gna, Romagna—d. April 10, 1585, Rome, Papal States) Pope (1572–85)
who promulgated the GREGORIAN CALENDAR. After teaching at the Univer-
sity of Bologna, he served as a delegate to the Council of TRENT, became
a cardinal in 1565, and was elected pope in 1572. A promoter of the
COUNTER-REFORMATION, he sought to execute the reform decrees of the coun-
cil. He compiled the INDEX LIBRORUM PROHIBITORUM and founded several col-
leges and seminaries, delegating their direction to the Jesuits. Aided by
an astronomer and a mathematician, he corrected the errors in the Julian
calendar and issued the Gregorian calendar (1582), which was later
adopted worldwide.
Gregory, Augusta, Lady orig. Isabella Augusta Persse (b.
IRISH LITERAR Y RENAISSANCE. With WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS, she helped found the
Irish Literary Theatre (1898) and the ABBEY THEATRE (1904). She wrote
many dialect comedies based on Irish peasant life, including those col-
lected in Seven Short Plays (1909). She also translated plays by Molière
and others into an Anglo-Irish dialect that she called “Kiltartan” and
translated and arranged Irish sagas into continuous narratives, published
as Cuchulain of Muirthemne (1902) and Gods and Fighting Men (1904).
Gregory of Nazianzus
sists of Bequia, Canouan, Mayreau, Mustique, Union Island, and
associated islets. Carriacou Island, the largest of the Grenada group, has
an area of 13 sq mi (34 sq km). Rainfall is low, and few of the islands
are inhabited.
Grenfell, Sir Wilfred (Thomason) (b. Feb. 28, 1865, Parkgate,
Grenoble
Greyhound Lines,
Inc. U.S.
corporation that has provided the
major intercity bus transportation in
the U.S. and Canada. It was founded in 1926 as Motor Transit Manage-
ment. Backed by the railroads, the company soon had a network of lines
spreading across the country. It adopted its current name in 1930. By 1933
Greyhound’s routes covered 40,000 mi (65,000 km). In the early 1980s
deregulation of the bus-transit industry led Greyhound to drop many local
bus lines. In 1987 Greyhound Corp. sold its bus operations, and Grey-
hound Lines, Inc., became an independent corporation devoted to inter-
city bus transportation. It was purchased in 1999 by Canada’s Laidlaw
Inc., a waste-management company.
greylag Most common Eurasian representative (Anser anser) of the
so-called gray GOOSE, and ancestor of all Occidental domestic geese. It
nests in temperate regions and winters from Britain to North Africa, India,
and China. It is pale gray with pink legs; the bill is pink in the eastern
race and orange in the western race.
Grieg
Grillparzer
Gromyko
Grotowski
growth hormone (GH) or somatotropin
Guadiana
guano
Guaviare
Guernsey
Guido d’Arezzo
Guinea-Bissau
Guise, Henri I de Lorraine, 3rd duke de (b. Dec. 31, 1550—d.
Dec. 23, 1588, Blois, France) French leader of the Catholic party and the
HOLY LEAGUE during the French Wars of RELIGION. When CATHERINE DE MÉDI-
CIS turned to the Guises in 1572 for help in removing the Huguenot GAS-
PARD II DE COLIGNY, Henri, who blamed Coligny for the murder of his father,
the 2nd duke de GUISE, helped plan the Massacre of SAINT BARTHOLOMEW’S
DAY. Fearing Guise’s growing popularity, HENR Y III made peace with the
Huguenots in 1576, and Guise angrily countered by forming the HOLY
LEAGUE. After Guise’s victory in the War of the THREE HENR YS (1588), Henry
was forced to surrender to the Holy League’s demands, and Guise was
appointed lieutenant general of France. Soon afterward the king’s body-
guard stabbed Guise to death; the next day his brother, Louis II (1555–
88), Cardinal de Guise, was also murdered.
Guise, Henri II de Lorraine, 5th duke de (b. April 4, 1614, Blois,
Guise
See also HERRING GULL; KITTIWAKE.
Gull, Sir William Withey (b.
gum or gingiva
Administration of Corrective Labour Camps) was largely unknown in the
West until the 1973 publication of ALEKSANDR SOLZHENITSYN’s Gulag Archi-
pelago. The Gulag consisted of hundreds of camps, under the control of
the secret police, where prisoners felled timber, worked in the mines, or
laboured on construction projects. At least 10% died each year from harsh
working conditions,
inadequate food, and summary executions. The
Gulag reached its height in the years of collectivization of Soviet agri-
culture (1929–32), during JOSEPH STALIN’s purges (1936–38), and immedi-
ately after World War II, shrinking only after Stalin’s death in 1953. An
estimated 15–30 million Russians died in the camps.
Gulbenkian, Calouste (Sarkis) (b. March 29, 1869, Istanbul,
shops. GUM now includes about 150 shops selling food, clothing, home
appliances, watches and cameras, and many other goods. It functions more
like a Western-style shopping mall than a department store and is a popu-
lar tourist attraction.
gum, chewing See CHEWING GUM
Gum Nebula Largest known emission NEBULA in terms of how much
of the sky it occupies as seen from Earth, extending over about 35° in the
southern constellations Puppis and Vela. A complex of diffuse, glowing
gas too faint to see with the unaided eye, it was discovered in the 1950s.
It lies roughly 1,000 light-years from Earth and may be the remnant of
an ancient SUPERNOVA.
gum tree See TUPELO
Gumal Pass
mainly in Burkina Faso, northern Côte d’Ivoire, northern Ghana, and
northern Togo. Moore in Burkina Faso has the largest number of speak-
ers, more than 6,000,000 (see MOSSI). Once considered a Gur language,
DOGON is spoken by about 600,000 people in Mali; it is of uncertain
affiliation within Niger-Congo.
Gurdjieff
Guthrie, Woody orig. Woodrow Wilson Guthrie (b. July 14,
Guwahati
Gwalior
H-R diagram See HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM
Ha-erh-pin See HARBIN
Haakon IV Haakonsson
Habsburg
hadron
Hagia Sophia
ernize his country and steer it into
the mainstream of African politics.
He brought Ethiopia into the League
of Nations and the UN and made
Addis Ababa the centre for
ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY (now
the African Union). Through most of
his reign he remained popular among
the majority Christian population.
He was deposed in 1974 in a mili-
tary coup by MENGISTU HAILE MARIAM
and kept under house arrest. He was
apparently killed by his captors.
Haile Selassie was regarded as the
Messiah of the African race by the
Rastafarian movement.
Hainan
performed with the Concertgebouw Orchestra in 1956. From 1961 to 1988
he was its permanent conductor, and he left a wide-ranging recorded
legacy. He also had a noteworthy opera career as head of the Glynde-
bourne (1978–88) and Covent Garden (from 1988) operas.
British forces in 1914 was largely due to his planning. He was lord chan-
cellor (1912–15) in H.H. ASQUITH’s government and again (1924) in JAMES
RAMSAY MACDONALD’s Labour Party government.
Haldeman
Halicarnassus
hall)j
halogen
hamm)r
TRENTON AND PRINCETON). He served as
TINENTAL CONGRESS, he argued for a
strong central government. As a del-
egate to the ANNAPOLIS CONVENTION in
1786, he drafted the address that led
to the CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION.
With JAMES MADISON and JOHN JAY, he
Hamito-Semitic languages See AFROASIATIC LANGUAGES
Hamm, Mia orig. Mariel Margaret Hamm (b. March 17, 1972,
Selma, Ala., U.S.) U.S. football (soccer) player. At the age of 15 Hamm
became the youngest person ever to play on the U.S. national soccer team.
In 1989 she entered the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and
there helped her team win four collegiate championships. She also helped
the U.S. team win the World Cup in 1991 and 1999 and the Olympic gold
medal in 1996. She broke the all-time international scoring record for
either men or women on May 16, 1999, against Brazil with her 108th
career goal.
Hammerstein
MERRIMACK. The port cities of NEWPORT NEWS, NORFOLK, and PORTSMOUTH
comprise the Port of Hampton Roads, one of the busiest U.S. seaports.
Hampton Roads Conference (Feb. 3, 1865) Informal and unsuc-
cessful peace talks at Hampton Roads, Va., during the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR.
Pres. ABRAHAM LINCOLN agreed to meet with the Confederate vice president,
ALEXANDER H. STEPHENS, to reach a peace settlement. Lincoln’s terms called
for a reunion of the nation, emancipation of the slaves, and disbanding
of Confederate troops. Since Stephens had been authorized to accept inde-
pendence only, no settlement was reached.
hamster Any of various stout Old World RODENTS (in the family
Muridae) with a short tail, soft fur,
and long cheek pouches for carrying
food. Hamsters are nocturnal and
generally live in burrows; they feed
on fruits, grain, and vegetables,
though some species also eat insects
and other small animals. The com-
mon hamster of Europe and western
Asia is 8–12 in. (20–30 cm) long,
without the 1–2.5-in. (3–6-cm) tail;
its coat is brown above and black
below, with white patches along each
side. The golden hamster of Syria is
a popular pet and is widely used as
a laboratory animal;
is golden
brown with white underparts and
6–8 in. (15–20 cm) long, including
the tail.
Hamsun
Handke
Handel, George Frideric orig. Georg Friedrich Händel (b.
Hangzhou or Hang-chou
Hanukkah
WAR. When Georgia seceded in 1861, Hardee resigned his commission
and assumed command of Confederate forces in northeastern Arkansas,
later demonstrating his military skills at the Battles of SHILOH and CHAT-
TANOOGA. As commander of the military department of South Carolina,
Georgia, and Florida, he attempted to halt the march of WILLIAM T. SHER-
MAN across Georgia. After the war he retired to his plantation.
Harden, Sir Arthur (b. Oct. 12, 1865, Manchester, Eng.—d. June 17,
1940, Bourne, Buckinghamshire) British biochemist. His more than 20
years of study of sugar fermentation advanced knowledge of metabolic
processes in all living forms. In 1929 he shared the Nobel Prize for Chem-
istry with Hans von Euler-Chelpin. He also produced pioneering studies
of bacterial enzymes and metabolism. He was knighted in 1936.
Hardenberg
short tail. Hares in northern latitudes
are white in winter and grayish
brown in summer; elsewhere, they
are usually grayish brown year-
round. Hares are primarily herbivo-
rous.
Hare Krishna movement
Harlequin
Harper, Stephen in full Stephen Joseph Harper (b. April 30,
COURTESY OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER,
GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
Stephen Harper.
Harpers Ferry National Historical Park National preserve, West
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
harp seal (cid:2) Harriman
FROM THE NATIONAL TRUST PROPERTY, FENTON HOUSE,
HAMPSTEAD, LONDON; BY GRACIOUS PERMISSION OF HER
MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH, THE QUEEN MOTHER
Harpsichord with soundboard by Hans
Ruckers, Amsterdam, 1612
for Pres. LYNDON B. JOHNSON, Harriman led the U.S. delegation to the Paris
peace talks with North Vietnam (1968–69).
Harris, Sir Arthur Travers, 1st Baronet (b. April 13, 1892, Chel-
Harris, Roy orig. LeRoy Ellsworth Harris (b. Feb. 12, 1898, near
Harrison, Benjamin (b. Aug.
1833, North Bend, Ohio,
U.S.—d. March 13, 1901,
India-
napolis, Ind.) 23rd president of the
U.S. (1889–93). The grandson of
WILLIAM H. HARRISON, the 9th presi-
Harrison, Sir Rex orig. Reginald Carey Harrison (b. March 5,
ANTHONY WAYNE at
Harrods
its graduates include RICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN, Lord BYRON, SIR ROBERT PEEL,
and WINSTON CHURCHILL.
Harsa or Harsha
ing perception of shapes. He showed how simple retinal mechanisms
constitute vital steps in the integration of visual information. In 1967 he
shared a Nobel Prize with GEORGE WALD and RAGNAR ARTHUR GRANIT.
Hartmann von Aue
Hasdeu
Hathor
Hausa
848 I Hawaiian goose (cid:2) hawthorn
ians made implements of stone, wood, shell, teeth, and bone. They had a
highly developed oral culture and possessed percussion, string, and wind
instruments. Their basic unit of land, the ahupuaa, usually extended from
the shore to the mountaintop, providing the occupants with the means to
grow and gather all they needed. Hawaiians had four principal gods and
many lesser deities. Their laws, which included intricate taboos, bore
heavily upon the people, especially women. After the arrival of Christian
missionaries in 1820, some of the more repressive laws and taboos were
abolished, but the native population was devastated by Western diseases.
Numbering about 300,000 in 1778, full-blooded Hawaiians today num-
ber fewer than 10,000.
Hawaiian goose See NENE
hawk Any of many small to medium-sized, diurnal BIRDS OF PREY, par-
ticularly those in the genus Accipiter.
The term is often applied to other
birds
in the Accipitridae family
(including BUZZARDS, HARRIERS, and
GOSHAWK, SPARROW HAWK.
Red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis).
ALAN CAREY
the EVENT HORIZON of a BLACK HOLE. STEPHEN W. HAWKING proposed in 1974
that SUBATOMIC PARTICLE pairs (PHOTONs, NEUTRINOs, and some massive par-
ticles) arising naturally near the event horizon may result in one particle’s
escaping the vicinity of the black hole while the other particle, of nega-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Coleman Hawkins, c. 1943.
REPRINTED WITH PERMISSION OF DOWN BEAT MAGAZINE
Hawkins, Erick (b. April 23,
hawr al-hamm)r See Lake
hAMM0R
hawthorn Any of various thorny
shrubs or small trees of the genus
Hawthorn (Crataegus)
WALTER CHANDOHA
Haya de la Torre
Hazeltine
and a special ELECTORAL COMMISSION
Gov. JOHN PETER ALTGELD.
Hays Office formally Motion Picture Producers and Distribu-
Hayworth, Rita orig. Margarita Carmen Cansino (b. Oct. 17,
INSURANCE.
health maintenance organization (HMO) Public or private
Heaney
852 I
heart attack (cid:2) heat pump
beat. See also CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM.
Structure of the human heart. Oxygen-rich blood from the lungs enters the heart
through the pulmonary veins, passing into the left atrium and on to the left ventricle.
Contraction of the muscles of the left ventricle forces blood into the aorta. The mitral
valve prevents blood from moving back into the left atrium during contraction. Vari-
ous arteries branch off from the aorta to supply blood to all parts of the body.
Oxygen-poor blood draining from the body into the superior vena cava and infe-
rior vena cava flows to the right atrium, through the tricuspid valve, and into the
right ventricle. As the right ventricle contracts, oxygen-poor blood passes through
the pulmonary valve into the pulmonary arteries and on to the lungs to receive oxy-
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
heart attack or myocardial infarction Death of a section of HEART
muscle when its blood supply is cut off, usually by a blood clot in a coro-
nary artery narrowed by ATHEROSCLEROSIS. HYPERTENSION, DIABETES MELLITUS, high
CHOLESTEROL, cigarette SMOKING, and CORONAR Y HEART DISEASE increase the risk.
heart clam See COCKLE
heart disease Any disorder of the heart. Examples include CORONAR Y
HEART DISEASE, CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE, and PULMONAR Y HEART DISEASE, as well
ARRHYTHMIAs. Some CONNECTIVE TISSUE diseases (notably systemic LUPUS ER YTHE-
MATOSUS, RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS, and SCLERODERMA) can affect the heart. HEART
FAILURE may result from many of these disorders.
heart failure Inability of one or both sides of the HEART to pump enough
blood for the body. Causes include PULMONAR Y HEART DISEASE, HYPERTENSION,
and coronary ATHEROSCLEROSIS. A person with left-sided heart failure expe-
riences shortness of breath after exertion, difficulty in breathing while
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
BOLTZMANN.
COOLING SYSTEM.
heat exhaustion or heat prostration Response of the body to
is generated in the boiler and led to radiators through pipes. The high
temperature of the steam makes it hard to control, and steam heating has
been largely superseded. A common type of electric heating system con-
verts electric current to heat by means of resistors that emit radiant energy.
See also RADIANT HEATING, SOLAR HEATING.
heatstroke Debility caused by exposure to heat and humidity, usually
for many hours, called sunstroke when caused by direct sunlight. Body
temperature is 106–110°F (41–43°C) or higher. Perspiration almost stops,
leading to the rapid temperature rise, collapse, and coma. Cooling with
ice-water baths or packs, with massage to promote circulation, is urgent
to save the victim’s life. Even after body temperature drops, circulatory
disorder and brain damage may cause death. See also HEAT EXHAUSTION.
heaven Dwelling place of God or the gods and the abode of the blessed
dead. The term also refers to the
celestial sphere, the place of the sun,
moon, planets, and stars and the
source of light, which symbolizes
good. For later Judaism and Chris-
tianity, heaven is the destination of
the faithful after a general resurrec-
tion of the dead, in contrast to HELL,
the place of punishment
wicked. Islam has a similar belief. In
Chinese religion, heaven is equated
with the divine will, which guides
the operation of all physical and
moral laws. In some Mahayana Bud-
dhist sects, heaven is a paradise for
those who have received the saving
grace of AMITABHA.
Heaven’s Gate U.S.
in UNIDENTIFIED FLYING
Heaviside
the refrigerant and becomes heated during the process. The liquid refrig-
erant then enters the throttle valve and expands, coming out as a liquid-
vapour mixture at a lower temperature and pressure. It then enters the
evaporator, where the liquid is evaporated by contact with the warmer
space. The vapour then passes to the compressor and the cycle is repeated.
A heat pump is a reversible system and is commonly used both to heat
and to cool buildings. It operates on the same thermodynamic principles
as REFRIGERATION.
Heath, Sir Edward (Richard George) (b. July 9, 1916, Broad-
trees, including AZALEAS, RHODODENDRONS, MOUNTAIN LAUREL, BLUEBERRIES, and
can be delivered by CONVECTION, RADIATION, and THERMAL CONDUCTION. With
the exception of the ancient Romans, who developed a form of central
heating, most cultures relied on direct heating methods such as FIREPLACES
and stoves. Central heating, adopted for use again in the 19th century, is
a method of indirect heating: heat is produced away from the occupants
and then conveyed to them. In warm-air heating, air heated by a furnace
rises through ducts to rooms above, where it is emitted through grills. In
hot-water systems, a pump circulates water from a boiler through a sys-
tem of pipes to radiators or convectors in rooms. In steam systems, steam
heavy water or deuterium
Hebron
Hegelianism
Heine
helioflagellate
Heller, Yom Tov (Lipmann ben Nathan Ha-Levi) (b. 1579,
Helmand River or Helmund
hemangioma
Henan
Henrietta Maria French Henriette-Marie (b. Nov. 25, 1609, Paris,
Henry I known as Henry Beauclerc
Henry VII orig. Henry Tudor, earl of Richmond (b. Jan. 28,
Henry VII German Heinrich (b.
Henry V (cid:2) Henry
THE BRIDGEMAN ART LIBRARY/NATIONAL MUSEUMS AND
GALLERIES ON MERSEYSIDE (WALKER ART GALLERY,
LIVERPOOL)
Henry VIII, oil on panel by the studio of
Hans Holbein the Younger, after 1537;
in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool,
England.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Henry, Saint See HENR Y II (GERMANY)
Henry Beauclerc See HENR Y I (ENGLAND)
Henry of Anjou See HENR Y II (ENGLAND)
Henry Plantagenet See HENR Y II (ENGLAND)
Henry the Navigator Portuguese Henrique o Navegador
orig. Henrique, infante (prince) de Portugal, duque (duke)
de Viseu, senhor (lord) da Covilha (b. March 4, 1394, Porto,
Port.—d. Nov. 13, 1460, Vila do Infante, near Sagres) Portuguese prince
and patron of explorers. He helped his father, JOHN I, capture the Moroc-
can city of Ceuta in 1415 and served as governor of Ceuta and later of
the Portuguese province of Algarve. He established his own court at
Sagres and sponsored voyages of discovery in the Madeira Islands and
along the western coast of Africa. As grand master of the Order of Christ,
he gained funds for backing voyages aimed at the conversion of pagans.
His patronage led to the development of the Portuguese caravel and
improved navigational instruments and the advancement of cartography.
Henry Tudor See HENR Y VII (ENGLAND)
Henson, Jim in full James Maury Henson (b. Sept. 24, 1936,
Henze
rowed by THOMAS SHERATON and DUNCAN PHYFE.
heptathlon Women’s athletics competition. Contestants take part in
seven different TRACK-AND-FIELD events: 100-m hurdles, SHOT PUT, HIGH JUMP,
LONG JUMP, JAVELIN THROW, and 200- and 800-m runs. The two-day event
replaced the women’s PENTATHLON in the Olympic Games after 1981.
Hepworth, Dame (Jocelyn) Barbara (b. Jan. 10, 1903, Wake-
Heracleitus
herbivore
major types of hermeneutics have emerged: literal (asserting that the text
is to be interpreted according to the “plain meaning”), moral (seeking to
establish the principles from which ethical lessons may be drawn), alle-
gorical (interpreting narratives as having a level of reference beyond the
explicit), and anagogical or mystical (seeking to explain biblical events
as they relate to the life to come). More recently the word has come to
refer to all “deep” reading of literary and philosophical texts.
Hermes
told by OVID and was treated by CHRISTOPHER MARLOWE in his play Hero and
Leander and by Lord BYRON in The Bride of Abydos.
Herod known as Herod the Great (b. 73 BC—d. March/April, 4 BC,
Jericho, Judaea) Roman-appointed king of JUDAEA (37–4 BC). A practicing
Jew, he was of Arab origin. He was critical to imperial control of Judaea,
despite his earlier support of Mark ANTONY, and the Roman emperor
increased his territory. Judaea prospered under his early reign, during
which he increased trade and built fortresses, aqueducts, and theatres, but
he could not give full rein to his desire to build and thrive because he
feared the PHARISEEs, Judaism’s controlling faction, who viewed him as a
foreigner. He lost favour through increasing cruelty, manifest in the mur-
der of his wife, her sons, and other relatives. His grip on his kingdom
weakened as he became increasingly mentally unstable and physically
debilitated. He killed his eldest son, and he slew the infants of Bethlehem
(see JESUS). He died shortly after a bungled suicide attempt.
Herod Agrippa I
Herriot
Hertzog
Hesse
SS, becoming SS chief for Berlin (1934), head of the Reich Security Cen-
tral Office (1939), and HEINRICH HIMMLER’s chief deputy. Noted for his ruth-
lessness against “enemies of the state,” in the early years of World War
II he organized mass executions in the German-occupied territories and
became known as “the Hangman.” In 1942 he chaired the WANNSEE CON-
FERENCE. Appointed deputy administrator of Bohemia and Moravia, he was
assassinated by Czech patriots; in retaliation the Gestapo demolished the
village of Lidice and executed its male population of about 200.
Heyerdahl
Hidalgo
Hickok, Wild Bill orig. James Butler Hickok (b. May 27, 1837,
Hicks, Sir John R(ichard) (b. April 8, 1904, Leamington Spa, War-
wickshire, Eng.—d. May 20, 1989, Blockley, Gloucestershire) British
economist. He taught at several institutions, notably the University of
WRITING, phonetic hieroglyphs denoted consonants, not syllables, so there
was no regular way to write vowels; by convention, Egyptologists insert
the vowel e between consonants in order to pronounce Egyptian words.
The standardized orthography of the Middle Kingdom (2050–1750 BC)
employed about 750 hieroglyphs. In the early centuries AD, use of hiero-
glyphs declined—the last dated text is from AD 394—and the meaning of
the signs was lost until their decipherment in the early 19th century (see
J.-F. CHAMPOLLION; ROSETTA STONE). The term hieroglyph has been applied
to similar systems of writing, notably a script used to write the ancient
ANATOLIAN LANGUAGE Luvian and a script used by the Maya (see MAYAN
HIEROGLYPHIC WRITING).
hierophant
hij)z, Al- See HEJAZ
Hijrah
Hilliard
Hindu Kush
thorough training on viola, violin, clarinet, and piano. He became con-
certmaster of the Frankfurt Opera at age 20, and his compositions began
drawing attention at new-music festivals. Because his wife was Jewish
and his music was considered “degenerate” by the Nazis, he left Germany
in 1938, settling in the U.S. in 1940. Advocating Gebrauchsmusik (“use-
ful music”), he wrote solo sonatas and concertos for many of the standard
orchestral instruments. Mathis der Maler (1935) is the best known of his
six operas; the symphony based on it, and the Symphonic Metamorpho-
sis on Themes of Weber (1943), are widely performed.
Hindenburg, Paul von in full Paul Ludwig Hans Anton von
Beneckendorff und von Hin-
hip-hop See RAP
Hipparchus or Hipparchos
Hiroshima
Hitler Youth German Hitler-Jugend
Ho Chi Minh orig. Nguyen Sinh Cung (b. May 19, 1890, Hoang
Tru, Viet.—d. Sept. 2, 1969, Hanoi) President (1945–69) of the Democratic
Republic of Vietnam (North Vietnam). Son of a poor scholar, he was
brought up in a rural village. In 1911 he found work on a French steamer
and traveled the world, then spent six years in France, where he became a
socialist. In 1923 he went to the Soviet Union; the next year he went to
China, where he started organizing exiled Vietnamese. He founded the
Indochina Communist Party in 1930 and its successor, the VIET MINH, in
1941. In 1945 Japan overran Indochina, overthrowing its French colonial
rulers; when the Japanese surrendered to the Allies six months later, Ho and
his Viet Minh forces seized the opportunity, occupied Hanoi, and pro-
claimed Vietnamese independence. France refused to relinquish its former
colony, and the First INDOCHINA WAR broke out in 1946. Ho’s forces defeated
the French in 1954 at Dien Bien Phu, after which the country was parti-
tioned into North and South Vietnam. Ho, who ruled in the north, was soon
embroiled with the U.S.-backed regime of NGO DINH DIEM in the south in
what became known as the VIETNAM WAR; North Vietnamese forces pre-
vailed over the south six years after Ho’s death.
Ho Chi Minh City formerly Saigon
for his comparative studies of social development. He sought to correlate
social change with its contribution to the general advance of the commu-
nity, focusing especially on the intellectual, moral, and religious elements
of change. He joined the staff of the Manchester Guardian (1897) and
continued to write for the newspaper after leaving to teach sociology at
the London School of Economics (1904–29). Among his works are Mor-
als in Evolution (1906), The Rational Good (1921), and Elements of Social
Justice (1922).
Hockney, David (b. July 9, 1937, Bradford, Eng.) British painter,
draftsman, printmaker, photographer, and stage designer. He studied at
the Bradford College of Art and the Royal College of Art in London. In
the mid 1960s he taught at the Universities of Iowa, Colorado, and Cali-
fornia, and in 1978 he settled permanently in Los Angeles. His portraits,
self-portraits, still lifes, and quiet scenes of friends are characterized by
economy of technique, preoccupation with light, bright colours, and a
frank, mundane realism derived from POP ART and photography. The Cali-
fornia swimming pool became one of his favourite themes. A brilliant
draftsman and printmaker, he published series of etchings, including illus-
trations for Six Fairy Tales of the Brothers Grimm (1969). In the 1970s
he achieved prominence as a set designer for the opera and ballet. He
later experimented with photography and photocollage, and still later with
computer technology and printers.
Hodges, Johnny orig. John Cornelius Hodges (b. July 25, 1906,
Hodgkin, Dorothy M(ary) orig. Dorothy Mary Crowfoot (b.
Hodgkin disease or
lymphoreticuloma
tion with vivid examinations of human character. Hoffmann also worked
as a conductor, music critic, and theatrical musical director. The most
successful of his many original musical works were the ballet Arlequin
(1811) and the opera Undine (performed 1816). He died at age 46 of pro-
gressive paralysis. His stories inspired notable operas and ballets by
JACQUES OFFENBACH (Tales of Hoffmann), LÉO DELIBES (Coppélia), PYOTR
TCHAIKOVSKY (The Nutcracker), and PAUL HINDEMITH (Cardillac).
Hoffmann
Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst
holding company Corporation
886 I Holley (cid:2) Holocaust
MARSHALL WARREN NIRENBERG and HAR GOBIND KHORANA.
Holliday, Doc orig. John Henry Holliday (baptized March 21,
Hollweg, Theobald von Bethmann See Theobald von BETHMANN
HOLLWEG
holly Any of approximately 400 species of red- or black-berried orna-
mental shrubs and trees that make up
the genus Ilex (family Aquifoli-
aceae), including the popular Christ-
hollies. English
holly
aquifolium) bears shiny, spiny, dark,
evergreen leaves; American holly (I.
opaca) has oblong, prickly leaves;
both have usually red fruits. There
spineless
and yellow-fruited
forms of both species.
Holly, Buddy orig. Charles
American holly (Ilex opaca)
© NOBLE PROCTOR FROM THE NATIONAL AUDUBON
SOCIETY COLLECTION/PHOTO RESEARCHERS
Hollyhock (Althaea rosea)
LEFEVER/GRUSHOW FROM GRANT HEILMAN
PHOTOGRAPHY, INC.
Hanya Holm, 1929.
COURTESY OF THE DANCE COLLECTION, THE NEW YORK
PUBLIC LIBRARY AT LINCOLN CENTER, HANYA HOLM
COLLECTION
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Holocene
Holy Spirit or Holy Ghost or Paraclete In Christianity, the third
Holy Synod
Homestead National Monument Memorial,
hominid
homosexual rights movement See GAY RIGHTS MOVEMENT
Homyel
honeysuckle family Family
Hong Kong Chinese Xianggang
Hongze Lake Chinese Hongze Hu or Hung-tse Hu
brother of HORACE EVERETT HOOPER, publisher of ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA.
Hoorn Islands See FUTUNA ISLANDS
the HOOVER COMMISSION.
Hoover, J(ohn) Edgar (b. Jan. 1,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
J. Edgar Hoover
AP/WIDE WORLD PHOTOS
Hooker (cid:2) Hope diamond
hop, step, and jump See TRIPLE
Hope, Bob orig. Leslie Townes
GRANT HEILMAN
Hop vine (Humulus lupulus) with female
flowers (cones), which are used in
brewing.
Hopeh See HEBEI
Hopewell
culture
Mound Builders Most notable
formerly
WOODLAND CULTURE.
hoplite
Hornbostel
servatory and made his debut in 1921. His stunning technique gained him
a large international reputation, and he became an inveterate touring per-
former, giving 100 concerts a year in the U.S. alone. In 1933 he married
ARTURO TOSCANINI’s daughter, Wanda. Always susceptible to nervous strain,
in 1953 he decided to quit public performance; his return to the concert
stage in 1965 was attended by great publicity. He favoured the works of
Romantics such as ROBERT SCHUMANN, FRÉDÉRIC CHOPIN, FRANZ LISZT, and his
friend SERGEY RACHMANINOFF. He continued to perform into his 80s.
horror story Story intended to elicit a strong feeling of fear. Such tales
are of ancient origin and form a substantial part of folk literature. They
may feature supernatural elements such as GHOSTs, witches, or VAMPIREs or
address more realistic psychological fears. In Western literature, the lit-
erary cultivation of fear and curiosity for its own sake emerged in the
18th century with the GOTHIC NOVEL. Classic practitioners of the horror and
gothic genres include HORACE WALPOLE, MAR Y SHELLEY, E.T.A. HOFFMANN,
EDGAR ALLAN POE, Sheridan Le Fanu (1814–73), WILKIE COLLINS, BRAM STOKER,
AMBROSE BIERCE, and STEPHEN KING.
External features of a horse.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
horror story (cid:2) horseshoe pitching
PREAKNESS STAKES, and BELMONT STAKES. See also STEEPLECHASE.
horsehair worm or hairworm or gordian worm Any of about
Horseshoe crab (Limulus polyphemus).
RUNK/SCHOENBERGER FROM GRANT HEILMAN
Horthy
Hottentot See KHOIKHOI
Houdini
house sparrow or English sparrow One of the world’s best-
900 I
house sparrow (cid:2) Houston
known and most abundant small
birds
(Passer domesticus,
family
Passeridae or Ploceidae). It lives in
towns and on farms worldwide, hav-
ing accompanied Europeans from its
original home in Eurasia and north-
ern Africa. Introduced into North
America in 1852, it spread across the
continent within a century. It is about
6 in. (15 cm) long and buffy-brown;
the male has a black bib. House spar-
rows breed nearly year-round in
warm regions. See also SPARROW.
House Un-American Activi-
ties Committee (HUAC) Com-
House sparrow (Passer domesticus)
ERIC HOSKING
mittee of the U.S. House of Representatives, established in 1938 under
MARTIN DIES as chairman, that conducted investigations through the 1940s
and ’50s into alleged communist activities. Those investigated included
many artists and entertainers, including the HOLLYWOOD TEN, ELIA KAZAN,
PETE SEEGER, BERTOLT BRECHT, and ARTHUR MILLER. RICHARD NIXON was an active
Housefly (Musca domestica) on a
doughnut
AVRIL RAMAGE—© OXFORD SCIENTIFIC FILMS LTD.
including CHOLERA, DYSENTER Y, and
Houseman, John orig. Jacques Haussmann (b. Sept. 22, 1902,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Houston
(pop.,
2000:
1,953,631), southern Texas, U.S. An
inland port, it is linked by the Hous-
ton Ship Channel
to the Gulf of
A.E. Housman, detail of a drawing by
William Rothenstein, 1906; in the
National Portrait Gallery, London.
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY,
LONDON
MEXICO and to the GULF INTRACOASTAL WATERWAY at GALVESTON. Founded in
Sam Houston, photograph by Mathew
Brady
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, WASHINGTON, D.C.
Hovenweep
Howe, William Howe, 5th Viscount (b. Aug. 10, 1729—d. July
12, 1814, Plymouth, Devonshire, Eng.) British military commander. The
brother of Adm. Richard Howe, he fought in the last FRENCH AND INDIAN
WAR (1754–63), in which he earned a reputation as one of the army’s
most brilliant young generals. In the AMERICAN REVOLUTION, he succeeded
Thomas Gage as supreme commander of British forces in North America
in 1776. He soon captured New York City and the surrounding area, and
in 1777 he led British troops to victories at the Battles of the BRANDYWINE
and of GERMANTOWN. Moving his forces to Philadelphia, he left troops
under JOHN BURGOYNE vulnerable in New York state, thus contributing to
the British defeat at the Battles of SARATOGA. He resigned in 1778 and was
succeeded by HENR Y CLINTON.
Howe Caverns Cavern system, east-central New York, U.S. Located
west of ALBANY and named for Lester Howe, who discovered them in 1842,
the limestone caves have grotesque rock formations and underground
channels. Elevators and boat rides are available. A second group, Secret
Caverns, with underground waterfalls and fossilized marine life, is nearby.
Howel Dda See HYWEL DDA
Hoxha
Hsüan-hsueh See XUANXUE
Hsüan-tsang See XUANZANG
Hsüan Tsung See XUANZONG
Hsün-tzu See XUNZI
HTML in full HyperText Markup Language MARKUP LANGUAGE
derived from SGML that is used to prepare HYPERTEXT documents. Relatively
easy for nonprogrammers to master, HTML is the language used for docu-
ments on the WORLD WIDE WEB. The text coding consists of commands
contained in angle brackets <> that affect the display of elements such as
titles, headings, text, font style, colour, and references to other documents,
which can be interpreted by an Internet BROWSER according to style rules.
HTTP in full HyperText Transfer Protocol Standard application-
Hu, Sia, and Heh
Hubei
Canada. It remained a large fur-collecting and marketing agency until
1991, with extensive real-estate interests and many department stores.
Hugo Award or Science Fiction Achievement Award Any of
Huguenots
Hull (cid:2) human sacrifice
erectus and modern humans, H. heidelbergensis may have been an ances-
tor of modern humans and also of the NEANDERTHALs (H. neanderthalen-
sis), who inhabited Europe and western Asia from c. 200,000 to 28,000
years ago. Fully modern humans (H. SAPIENS) seem to have emerged in
Africa only c. 150,000 years ago, perhaps having descended directly from
H. erectus or from an intermediate species such as H. heidelbergensis.
human factors engineering See ERGONOMICS
human growth hormone See GROWTH HORMONE
human immunodeficiency virus See HIV
GENETICS; HOMO SAPIENS; PERSONALITY; PHILOSOPHICAL ANTHROPOLOGY; SOCIOBIOL-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
908 I
humanism (cid:2) Hume
Humanities, National Endowment for the See NATIONAL
ENDOWMENT FOR THE HUMANITIES
Humboldt,
(Friedrich Wil-
helm Heinrich) Alexander,
Freiherr (baron) von (b. Sept.
14, 1769, Berlin, Prussia—d. May 6,
1859, Berlin) German naturalist and
explorer. In 1792 he joined the min-
ing department of the Prussian gov-
ernment, where he invented a safety
lamp and established a technical
school for miners. From 1799 he
explored Central and South America,
traveling in the Amazon jungles and
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Alexander von Humboldt, oil painting
by Friedrich Georg Weitsch, 1806; in
the National Museums in Berlin.
COURTESY OF THE STAATLICHE MUSEEN ZU BERLIN
Humboldt, (Karl) Wilhelm, baron von (b. June 22, 1767, Pots-
Humboldt University of Berlin See University of BERLIN
adopt UTILITARIANISM. With JOHN LOCKE and GEORGE BERKELEY, Hume is
regarded as one of the great philosophers of EMPIRICISM.
Hume, John (b. Jan. 18, 1937, Londonderry, N.Ire.) Leader of the
Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) in Northern Ireland from
1979 to 2001 and corecipient with DAVID TRIMBLE of the Nobel Prize for
Peace in 1998. A schoolteacher, Hume became a Roman Catholic leader
in the Northern Ireland civil rights movement in the 1960s. He was elected
to the parliaments of Northern Ireland (1969), Europe (1979), and Brit-
ain (1983). A moderate, he condemned the use of violence by the IRISH
REPUBLICAN ARMY (IRA). In the late 1980s he attempted to persuade the IRA
to abandon the armed struggle against Britain and enter democratic poli-
tics. He risked his personal safety to engage in sometimes secret dialogues
with leaders of SINN FÉIN, the IRA’s political wing, and he played a lead-
ing role in negotiating the Good Friday Agreement, the multiparty peace
accord between unionists and nationalists reached in April 1998. Elected
to the new Northern Ireland Assembly in June, he resigned his seat two
years later because of ill health.
humidity Amount of water vapour in the air. One of the most variable
characteristics of the atmosphere, humidity is an important factor in cli-
mate and weather: it regulates air temperature by absorbing thermal radia-
tion both from the Sun and the Earth; it is directly proportional to the
latent energy available for the generation of storms; and it is the ultimate
source of all forms of condensation and precipitation. Humidity varies
because the water-holding capacity of air is determined by temperature.
When a volume of air at a given temperature holds the maximum amount
of water vapour possible, the air is said to be saturated. Relative humid-
ity is the water-vapour content of the air relative to its content at satura-
tion. Saturated air has a relative humidity of 100%; near the Earth the
relative humidity rarely falls below 30%.
Hummel
910 I Hundred Days (cid:2) Hünkâr rskelesi
Hundred Years’ War (1337–1453)
Hung Hsiu-ch’üan See HONG XIUQUAN
Hung-shan culture See HONGSHAN CULTURE
Hung-shui River See HONGSHUI RIVER
Hung T’ai-chi See HONGTAIJI
Hung-tse Hu See HONGZE LAKE
Hung-wu emperor See HONGWU EMPEROR
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Hunkers and Barnburners Two factions of the New York state
Democratic Party in the 19th century. The party split over slavery in the
1840s. The conservative Hunkers (so called by their opponents as those
who “hunkered” or “hankered” after political office), led by WILLIAM
MARCY, favoured the annexation of Texas and denounced antislavery agi-
tation. The radical and reformist Barnburners (so called by their oppo-
nents as those who burned the barn to get rid of the rats), led by MARTIN
VAN BUREN, opposed slavery’s extension into new territories. At the 1848
Democratic national convention, the Barnburners joined the FREE SOIL
PARTY, nominating Van Buren for president. In the 1850s some Barnburn-
ers returned to the Democratic Party while others joined the new Repub-
lican Party.
Hunt, H(aroldson) L(afayette) (b. Feb. 17, 1889, Ramsey, Ill.,
JENNER.
Hunter, William (b. May 23, 1718, Long Calderwood, Lanarkshire,
Scot.—d. March 30, 1783, London, Eng.) British obstetrician, educator,
and medical writer. The brother of JOHN HUNTER, he studied medicine at
the University of Glasgow and became a licensed physician in London
in 1756. He introduced the French practice of providing individual medi-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Hunkers and Barnburners (cid:2) Huntington
hunting and gathering society Any human society that depends
Hunyadi
Hussite
Huygens
Hyderabad
hydrogen bomb or H-bomb or thermonuclear bomb Weapon
hydrogenation
Hyksos
HyperText Markup Language See HTML
HyperText Transfer Protocol See HTTP
hypnosis State that resembles SLEEP but is induced by a person (the hyp-
notist) whose suggestions are readily accepted by the subject. The hyp-
notized individual seems to respond in an uncritical, automatic fashion,
ignoring aspects of the environment (e.g., sights, sounds) not pointed out
by the hypnotist. Even the subject’s memory and awareness of self may
be altered by suggestion, and the effects of the suggestions may be
extended (posthypnotically) into the subject’s subsequent waking activ-
ity. The history of hypnotism is as old as that of sorcery and magic. It was
popularized in the 18th century by FRANZ ANTON MESMER (as “mesmerism”)
and was studied in the 19th century by the Scottish surgeon James Braid
(1795–1860). SIGMUND FREUD relied on it in exploring the UNCONSCIOUS, and
it eventually came to be recognized in MEDICINE and PSYCHOLOGY as useful
in helping to calm or anesthetize patients, modify unwanted behaviours,
and uncover repressed memories. There remains no generally acceptable
explanation for hypnosis, though one prominent theory focuses on the
possibility of discrete dissociative states affecting portions of CONSCIOUS-
NESS.
hypochondriasis
be performed after CESAREAN SECTION in cases of complications such as
uncontrolled bleeding, gross infection, or pelvic cancer.
hysteresis
I Am movement U.S. religious movement founded in the 1930s by Guy
Ballard (1878–1939) and his wife, Edna (1886–1971). They taught that the
Mighty I Am is the source of power in everything, a power available to
individuals through a number of Ascended Masters, including Jesus.
Another important Ascended Master, St. Germain, spoke to Guy Ballard at
Mount Shasta in northern California and revealed Ballard’s many previous
lives. The movement suffered a setback when Guy died in 1939 and another
when Edna and her son were indicted for fraud in 1940; though the indict-
ment was set aside in 1946, the movement had by then lost its vitality.
I-ch’ang See YICHANG
I Ching See YIJING
I-pin See YIBIN
Iacocca
Ibiza
Ibn Sln) See AVICENNA
Ibn ’aymiyyah
A typical professional North American ice-hockey rink. U.S. college rinks are usually wider (100 ft), and international rinks
vary in both length and width. Blue lines mark the respective off-sides areas; the space between them is called the neutral zone.
The puck is put into play by being dropped between two players at the face-off spots; all players except those facing off must
stand outside the face-off circle. A major penalty requires that a player go to the penalty box for five minutes while his team
plays shorthanded.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
consisting of U.S. and Canadian pro-
fessional
teams, was organized in
1917. Hockey was introduced at the Olympic Games in 1920. It is a very
aggressive game, and the puck is often taken from a player by means of
a hit to the body, called a check. Some contact, such as checking from
behind and slashing with the stick, is illegal and draws a penalty. See also
STANLEY CUP.
924 I
ice formation (cid:2) Icelandic language
timing and unison. Unlike FIGURE
SKATING, ice dancing does not allow
movements of strength or technical
skill
(particularly overhead lifts,
jumps, and spins of more than one-
and-a-half rotations). It has been an
Olympic event since 1976.
ice formation Any mass of ice
that occurs on the Earth’s continents
or surface waters. Such masses form
wherever substantial amounts of liq-
uid water freeze and remain in the
solid state for some period of time.
Examples include glaciers, icebergs,
sea ice, and ground ice associated
with PERMAFROST.
sity. The NATIONAL HOCKEY LEAGUE,
Icelanders’ sagas or family sagas Class of heroic prose narra-
tives written in the 13th century about the great families who lived in
Iceland from 930 to 1030. They represent the zenith of classical Icelan-
dic SAGA writing and are far in advance of any contemporary medieval
literature in their realism, controlled style, character delineation, and over-
whelming tragic dignity. Their artistic unity, length, and complexity sug-
gest that they were written by individual
authors rather than composed orally. Jus-
tice, not courage, is often the primary vir-
tue, as in the greatest of the family sagas,
NJÁLS SAGA.
Icelandic language National language of Iceland, one of the GER-
MANIC LANGUAGES. It developed from the Norse speech brought to Iceland
by settlers from western Norway in the 9th–10th centuries. Old Icelandic
(see OLD NORSE) is the language of the SAGAs and other medieval poems.
In grammar, vocabulary, and spelling, modern Icelandic is the most con-
servative of the Scandinavian languages; modern Icelanders can still read
Old Norse sagas. Icelandic once borrowed words from Danish, Latin, and
the Celtic and Romance languages, but a purist movement that began in
the early 19th century has replaced most of these loanwords with words
formed only from Icelandic elements.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Ichikawa
Iditarod
iguana
recognized ijtih)d, and jurists considered learned enough for this kind of
analysis have great authority. In the 20th century an attempt was made to
restore ijtih)d among Sunnites to help Islam adapt to the modern world.
Ike Taiga
Illyria
IMMUNOLOGY.
NOLOGY; LEUKOCYTE; RETICULOENDOTHELIAL SYSTEM.
immunity In law, exemption or freedom from liability. Under interna-
tional treaty, a diplomatic representative is exempt from local laws, both
civil and criminal. In many countries, judges, legislators, and government
officials, including the heads of state, enjoy limited or absolute immunity
at home to protect them from personal liability for wrongful acts or omis-
sions that arise from the performance of their duties. A public prosecutor
may grant immunity from prosecution to a witness who is suspected of
criminal activity in return for testimony against other suspected criminals.
immunodeficiency Defect in IMMUNITY that impairs the body’s ability
to resist infection. The IMMUNE SYSTEM may fail to function for many rea-
sons. Immune disorders caused by a genetic defect are usually evident
early in life. Others can be acquired at any age through infections (e.g.,
AIDS) or IMMUNOSUPPRESSION. Aspects of the immune response that may be
affected include LYMPHOCYTES, other LEUKOCYTES, ANTIBODIES, and COMPLEMENT.
of ALLERGIES, IMMUNOSUPPRESSION after organ TRANSPLANTS to prevent rejection,
and study of AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES and IMMUNODEFICIENCIES. AIDS has stimu-
post. See also TESTING MACHINE.
impala
built, the impala stands 30–40 in. (75–100 cm) high at the shoulder. It has
a golden to reddish brown coat, white underparts, a vertical black stripe
on each thigh, and a black tuft behind each hind hoof. The male has long,
lyre-shaped horns.
impatiens
French painting; it was disliked by Debussy himself. Elements often
termed impressionistic include static harmony, emphasis on instrumental
timbres that creates a shimmering interplay of “colours,” melodies that
lack directed motion, surface ornamentation that obscures or substitutes
for melody, and an avoidance of traditional musical form. Impressionism
can be seen as a reaction against the rhetoric of ROMANTICISM, disrupting
the forward motion of standard harmonic progressions. The other com-
poser most often associated with Impressionism is MAURICE RAVEL. Impres-
sionistic passages are common in earlier music by FRÉDÉRIC CHOPIN, FRANZ
LISZT, and RICHARD WAGNER, and in music by later composers such as CHARLES
IVES, BÉLA BARTÓK, and GEORGE GERSHWIN.
in vitro fertilization (IVF)
OF UNITS; MEASUREMENT; METRIC SYSTEM.
In’ch£n
934 I
India rubber plant (cid:2) Indian Ocean
varying mixtures of ethnic strains
drawn from peoples settled in the
subcontinent before the dawn of his-
tory or from invaders. Languages:
Hindi, English (both official), and
other
Indo-European
languages,
including Bengali, Kashmiri, Mar-
athi, and Urdu; DRAVIDIAN LANGUAGES;
the GANGES
the HIMALAYAS,
India rubber plant See RUBBER PLANT
Indian licorice See ROSAR Y PEA
Indian Mutiny or Sepoy Mutiny (1857–58) Widespread rebellion
against British rule in India begun by Indian troops (sepoys) in the ser-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Indian National Congress or Congress Party Broadly based
political party of India, founded in 1885. The Congress Party was a mod-
erate reform party until 1917, when it was taken over by its “extremist”
Home Rule wing (see BAL GANGADHAR TILAK). In the 1920s and ’30s, under
MOHANDAS K. GANDHI, it promoted noncooperation to protest the feeble-
ness of the constitutional reforms of 1919. During World War II, the party
announced that India would not support the war until granted complete
independence. In 1947 an Indian independence bill became law, and in
1950 the constitution took effect. JAWAHARLAL NEHRU dominated the party
from 1951 to 1964. The Indian National Congress formed most of India’s
governments from 1947 to 1996, but at the end of the 20th century, its
support plummeted. After several years out of power, it returned to gov-
ernment in 2004.
Indian Ocean Body of salt water stretching between Africa in the west,
Australia in the east, Asia in the north, and Antarctica in the south. With
an area of 28,360,000 sq mi (73,440,000 sq km), it covers approximately
one-seventh of the Earth’s surface, and it is the smallest of the world’s
three major oceans (see ATLANTIC OCEAN; PACIFIC OCEAN). Its greatest depth
(24,442 ft [7,450 m]) is in the Java Trench. Its chief marginal seas include
the RED SEA, ARABIAN SEA, PERSIAN GULF, ANDAMAN SEA, Bay of BENGAL, and
contributions to ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY.
ern Oklahoma. The CHOCTAW, CREEK, SEMINOLE, CHEROKEE, and CHICKASAW
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Indian paintbrush (cid:2) Indies
GUAGEs.
ever instituted for a colonial empire, and it set forth humane (if often
ignored) principles for treatment of Indians.
Indigenismo
Indonesian language See MALAY LANGUAGE
Indore
Indo-European languages Family of languages with the greatest
number of speakers, spoken in most of Europe and areas of European
settlement and in much of southwestern and southern Asia. They are
descended from a single unrecorded language believed to have been spo-
ken more than 5,000 years ago in the steppe regions north of the Black
Sea and to have split into a number of dialects by 3000 BC. Carried by
migrating tribes to Europe and Asia, these developed over time into sepa-
rate languages. The main branches are ANATOLIAN, Indo-Iranian (including
INDO-AR YAN and IRANIAN), GREEK, ITALIC, GERMANIC, ARMENIAN, CELTIC, ALBA-
NIAN, the extinct TOCHARIAN LANGUAGES, BALTIC, and SLAVIC. The study of
Indo-Gangetic Plain See GANGETIC PLAIN
Indochina or Indochinese Peninsula Region of mainland SOUTH-
938 I
induction heating (cid:2) Indus River
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
industrial and organizational relations or organizational
industrial medicine or occupational medicine Branch of medi-
cine dealing with workers’ health and the prevention and treatment of
diseases and injuries in the workplace. Workplace hazards include expo-
sure to dangerous materials including asbestos and coal dust, radiation
exposure, and machinery capable of causing injuries ranging from minor
to life-threatening.
Industrial medical programs mandate protective
devices around machines’ moving parts, proper ventilation of work areas,
use of less toxic materials, containment of production processes, and pro-
tective equipment and clothing. Good industrial medical programs
improve labour-management relations, increase workers’ overall health
and productivity, and reduce insurance costs.
industrial melanism
and maintenance services; education and teaching; and health, social wel-
fare, administrative, police, security, and defense services.
also DEFLATION, PRICE INDEX.
inflorescence
ink Fluid or paste of various colours (usually black or dark blue) used
for writing and PRINTING, composed of a PIGMENT or DYE in a liquid “vehicle.”
Early inks used lampblack (a form of CARBON) or coloured juices, extracts,
or suspensions of plant, animal, and mineral substances. Modern writing
inks usually contain ferrous sulfate (see IRON) with a small amount of an
acid; on paper, they darken and bond, becoming permanent. Coloured and
washable inks usually contain soluble synthetic dyes. Printing inks are
formulated for various requirements (including colour, opacity, fade resis-
tance, pliability, odourlessness, drying behaviour, and health and environ-
mental safety) for uses in OFFSET, LETTERPRESS, screen, ink-jet, laser, and other
printing.
Inkatha
work of EDGAR DEGAS, PIERRE-AUGUSTE
RENOIR, and PABLO PICASSO.
inheritance tax. See also INHERITANCE TAX; INTESTATE SUCCESSION; PROBATE.
competitive inhibition). See also ALLOSTERIC CONTROL, FEEDBACK INHIBITION,
REPRESSION.
Inniskilling See ENNISKILLEN
rnönü
insectivore
the national level, the president, as leader of the party, typically selected the
party’s next presidential candidate—thus effectively choosing his own suc-
cessor. Pres. ERNESTO ZEDILLO broke from that tradition in 1999, and the fol-
lowing year opposition candidate VICENTE FOX won the presidency, although
the PRI maintained control of several state governments.
instrumentalism or experimentalism Philosophy advanced by
Insull
cians who introduced them (FOURIER TRANSFORM, LAPLACE TRANSFORM).
integrated circuit (IC) or microcircuit or chip or microchip
Integrated Services Digital Network See ISDN
integument
With precision equipment, large numbers of identical parts could be pro-
duced at low cost and with a small workforce. See also AMERICAN SYSTEM
OF MANUFACTURE; ARMOUR Y PRACTICE; AUTOMOBILE industry; FACTOR Y; HENR Y FORD;
HENR Y LELAND.
intercontinental ballistic missile See ICBM
and the LIQUIDITY-PREFERENCE theory of JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES, according to
interferon
PROBLEM.
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) international organi-
948 I
intermediate-range nuclear weapons (cid:2) International Court of Justice
intermediate-range nuclear weapons Class of NUCLEAR WEAPONS
International, Communist See FIRST INTERNATIONAL, SECOND INTERNA-
TIONAL, COMINTERN
GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION.
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) International orga-
nization officially founded in 1957 to promote the peaceful use of NUCLEAR
ENERGY. Based in Vienna, its activities include research on the applicabil-
ity of nuclear energy to medicine, agriculture, water resources, and indus-
try; provision of
technical assistance; development of
radiation
safeguards; and public relations programs. Following the FIRST PERSIAN GULF
WAR, IAEA inspectors were called on to certify that Iraq was not manu-
facturing nuclear weapons. The IAEA and its director general, Mohamed
ElBaradei, were awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace in 2005.
International Bank for Economic Cooperation (IBEC) Inter-
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(IBRD) Main component organization of the WORLD BANK. The IBRD
lends money to middle-income and creditworthy poorer countries. Most
of its funds come from sales of bonds in international capital markets.
More than 180 countries are members of the IBRD. Each member’s vot-
ing power is linked to its capital subscription; the U.S., with some one-
sixth of the shares in the IBRD, has veto power over any proposed changes
to the bank. See also INTERNATIONAL MONETAR Y FUND; UNITED NATIONS DEVEL-
OPMENT PROGRAMME.
International Court of Justice
(ICJ) or World Court Principal
“The Internationals—United with the
Spaniards We Fight the Invader,”
poster by Parrilla, published by the
International Brigades, 1936–37.
COURTESY OF THE ABRAHAM LINCOLN BRIGADE
ARCHIVES, BRANDEIS UNIVERSITY LIBRARY
the LEAGUE OF
Cross section showing one cylinder of a four-stroke internal-combustion engine. In
the first stroke (shown), a cam (left) compresses a valve spring, opening the intake
valve to admit the fuel-air mixture to the cylinder. Both valves then close, the mixture
is compressed by the piston, and current is sent to the spark plug. Ignited by the
spark plug, the burning mixture forces the piston down, producing power to turn
the crankshaft and run the car. Another cam (right) opens the exhaust valve and the
burned exhaust gases exit.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Agency of the U.S. Department of
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
International Criminal Court (cid:2) International Refugee Organization
Council. Its 15-member body of judges, each of whom serves a nine-year
term, is elected by countries party to the court’s founding statute. No two
judges may come from the same country. See also EUROPEAN COURT OF JUS-
TICE.
International Criminal Court (ICC) Permanent judicial body estab-
international exchange See FOREIGN EXCHANGE
International Harvester Co. See NAVISTAR INTERNATIONAL CORP.
International Herald Tribune Daily newspaper published in Paris.
It has long been the staple source of English-language news for Ameri-
can expatriates, tourists, and businesspeople in Europe. Its roots are in the
Paris Herald (established 1887); a merger in 1924 between its parent, the
New York Herald, and the New York Tribune created the New York Herald-
Tribune and the Paris Herald Tribune. The Paris edition, which was far-
ing well at the time of its parent’s demise in 1966, was renamed when it
was rescued by a joint venture of the New York Times, the Washington
Post, and Whitney Communications. The New York Times Co. and the
Washington Post Co. became half-owners of the paper in 1991. The New
York Times Co. became the full owner in 2003.
International Labour Organization (ILO) Specialized agency of
International Ladies’ Garment Workers’ Union (ILGWU)
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
tection of nationals abroad. International courts, such as the INTERNATIONAL
COURT OF JUSTICE, resolve disputes on these and other matters, including
WAR CRIMEs. See also ASYLUM; IMMUNITY.
International Monetary Fund (IMF) Specialized agency of the
STRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT; WORLD BANK.
international organization Institution drawing membership from
at least three states, having activities in several states, and whose mem-
bers are held together by a formal agreement. Only a few existed before
1850; several thousand were active in the early 21st century. Some are
intergovernmental (e.g., the UNITED NATIONS), and some are nongovern-
mental (e.g., AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL). Some have multiple worldwide or
regional purposes (e.g., the EUROPEAN UNION), and some have single pur-
poses (e.g., the World Intellectual Property Organization). One effect of
their proliferation is a stronger sense of interdependence among states,
which in turn has stimulated recognition of the need for cooperation to
address international and global problems.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Orga-
sions for its BALANCE OF PAYMENTS.
International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) Set of symbols intended
International Refugee Organization (IRO) Temporary special-
ized agency of the UNITED NATIONS system (1946–52). The IRO assisted
refugees and displaced persons in Europe and Asia who could not or
would not return home after World War II. Taking over the work of its
principal predecessor, the UNITED NATIONS RELIEF AND REHABILITATION ADMINIS-
TRATION, it also assumed responsibility for the legal protection and resettle-
ment of
refugees previously carried out by the Intergovernmental
Committee on Refugees. It was succeeded by the Office of the UNITED
NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES.
applied ornamentation. WALTER GROPIUS, Ludwig MIES VAN DER ROHE, and LE
CORBUSIER are among the architects most clearly associated with the style.
See also BAUHAUS.
International System of Units or Système International
d’Unités
International Space Station (ISS) Space station assembled from
International Standard Book Number (ISBN) Ten-digit num-
Internet Protocol address (cid:2) Interpol
International System of Units*
(Basic Units)
LENGTH
Number of Meters
1,000
0.001
0.000001
Approximate U.S. Equivalent
0.62 mile
328.08 feet
32.81 feet
39.37 inches
3.94 inches
0.39 inch
0.039 inch
0.000039 inch
Number of Square Meters
Approximate U.S. Equivalent
1,000,000
10,000
0.0001
VOLUME
0.3861 square miles
2.47 acres
119.60 square yards
0.155 square inch
Number of Cubic Meters
Approximate U.S. Equivalent
0.001
0.000001
CAPACITY
Number of Liters
1,000
0.001
0.000001
MASS AND WEIGHT
Number of Grams
1,000,000
1,000
0.001
0.000001
1.307 cubic yards
61.023 cubic inches
0.061 cubic inch
cubic
Approximate U.S. Equivalent
liquid
1.31 cubic yards
3.53 cubic feet
0.35 cubic foot
61.02 cubic inches
61.02 cubic inches
6.1 cubic inches
0.61 cubic inch
0.061 cubic inch
0.000061 cubic inch
2.84 bushels
1.14 pecks
0.908 quart
0.908 quart
0.18 pint
2.64 gallons
1.057 quarts
1.057 quarts
0.21 pint
0.338 fluid ounce
0.27 fluid dram
0.00027 fluid dram
Approximate U.S. Equivalent
1.102 short tons
2.2046 pounds
3.527 ounces
0.353 ounce
0.035 ounce
1.543 grains
0.154 grain
0.015 grain
0.000015 grain
kilometer
hectometer
dekameter
meter
decimeter
centimeter
millimeter
micrometer
square kilometer
hectare
square centimeter
cubic meter
cubic decimeter
cubic centimeter
Abbreviation
Abbreviation
sq km or km2
sq cm or cm2
Abbreviation
cu cm or cm3 also cc
Abbreviation
kiloliter
hectoliter
dekaliter
liter
cubic decimeter
deciliter
centiliter
milliliter
microliter
metric ton
kilogram
hectogram
dekagram
decigram
centigram
milligram
microgram
Abbreviation
*For metric equivalents of U.S. units, see Weights and Measurements table
Internet Protocol address See IP ADDRESS
Internet service provider (ISP) Company that provides INTERNET
connections and services to individuals and organizations. For a monthly
fee, ISPs provide computer users with a connection to their site (see DATA
TRANSMISSION), as well as a log-in name and password. They may also pro-
vide software packages (such as BROWSERs), E-MAIL accounts, and a personal
WEB SITE or home page. ISPs can host Web sites for businesses and can
also build the Web sites themselves. ISPs are all connected to each other
through network access points, public network facilities on the Internet
backbone.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
intestine See LARGE INTESTINE, SMALL INTESTINE
intif)Fah
Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) (1887–1995) First REGU-
Inverness
nonpublic company. See also BANK; CENTRAL BANK; SAVINGS BANK; SECURITY.
WAX CASTING, DIE CASTING.
investment credit or investment tax credit Tax incentive that
investment trust or closed-end trust Financial organization that
included the epics of HOMER and the earliest elegiac and iambic poetry.
They began the study of geography, philosophy, and historiography in the
6th century. After Alexander the Great their literary language was the basis
of KOINE, or “common speech,” the language of practically all Greek writ-
ing to the present day.
Ionian
Iqaluit
1258. The OTTOMAN EMPIRE took control in the 16th century and ruled until
the British occupied the country during World War I (1914–18). The Brit-
ish created the kingdom of Iraq in 1921 and occupied Iraq again during
World War II (1939–45). The monarchy was restored following the war,
but a revolution caused its downfall in 1958. Following a series of mili-
tary coups, the socialist BA!TH PARTY, eventually led by ÍADD0M hUSSEIN, took
control and established totalitarian rule in 1968. The IRAN-IRAQ WAR in the
1980s and the First PERSIAN GULF WAR in 1990–91 caused extensive death
and destruction. The economy languished under a UN economic embargo
imposed on Iraq in the 1990s. The embargo began to erode by the early
21st century, and in 2003, during the Second PERSIAN GULF WAR, the Ba!th
Party was driven from power.
Irbid Town (pop., 1994: 208,329), northern Jordan. Built on Early
Bronze Age settlements, it may have been the biblical city of Beth Arbel
and the Arbila of the ancient DECAPOLIS. Modern Irbid is one of Jordan’s
industrial areas and an agricultural centre. The many springs in the area,
in addition to the YARMãK RIVER, provide water for irrigation. It is the home
of YarmHk University.
Iredell
Ireland, Northern See NORTHERN IRELAND
Irenaeus
underjaw, and the colours include gray, brindle, red-brown, black, and
white. The dog is valued as a gentle, even-tempered companion.
Irkutsk
MILLINGTON SYNGE, and SEAN O’CASEY. See also ABBEY THEATRE.
Irish Potato Famine (1845–49) Famine that occurred in Ireland when
the potato crop failed in successive years. By the early 1840s almost half
the Irish population, particularly the rural poor, was depending almost
entirely on the potato for nourishment. A reliance on only one or two
high-yielding varieties made the crop vulnerable to disease, including the
late blight fungus, which ruined the crop. The British government pro-
vided minimal relief to the starving Irish, limited to loans and soup kitch-
ens. The famine was a watershed in Ireland’s demographic history: more
than a million people died from starvation or famine-related diseases, and
perhaps as many as 1.5 million emigrated to North America and Britain.
Population continued to decline thereafter, and by independence in 1921
the Irish population was barely half of the 8.4 million it had been before
the famine.
Irish Rebellion See EASTER RISING
Irish wolfhound Tallest of all
the BATTLESHIP. See also MONITOR.
Iroquoian
Irtysh
dalous reports about her private life, and her arbitrary political interfer-
ence led to the Revolution of 1868, which drove her into exile. She
abdicated in favour of her son, ALFONSO XII.
Isabella Farnese
Isidore of Sevilla, Saint (b. c. 560, Cartagena or Sevilla, Spain—d.
April 4, 636, Sevilla; canonized 1598; feast day April 4) Spanish prelate
and scholar, last of the Western Fathers of the Church. He became arch-
bishop of Sevilla c. 600 and presided over several councils that shaped
church policy, including the fourth Council of TOLEDO (633). He also pro-
moted the conversion of the VISIGOTHs from ARIANISM to orthodox Chris-
tianity. His best-known work was Etymologies, an encyclopedia that
became a standard reference work in the Middle Ages. He also wrote
theological works, biographies, and treatises on natural science, cosmol-
ogy, and history. He was canonized in 1598 and declared a Doctor of the
Church in 1722.
isinglass See MUSCOVITE
narrow DEEP-SEA TRENCH.
Ism)!ll
Isonzo
Mosque of Süleyman, and the Blue Mosque. Its educational institutions
include the University of Istanbul (founded 1453), Turkey’s oldest uni-
versity.
Isthmian Games
SHIMON PERES, and YITZHAK RABIN.
Israeli, Isaac ben Solomon or Isaac the Elder (b. 832/855,
Istanbul formerly Constantinople ancient Byzantium City and
seaport (pop., 2000: 8,803,468), Turkey. Situated on a peninsula at the
entrance to the BLACK SEA, Turkey’s largest city lies on either side of the
BOSPORUS and thus is located in both Europe and Asia. Byzantium was
founded as a Greek colony in the 8th century BC. Passing to the Persian
Achaemenian dynasty in 512 BC and then to ALEXANDER THE GREAT, it became
a free city under the Romans in the 1st century AD. The emperor CON-
STANTINE I made the city the seat of the Eastern Roman Empire in 330, later
naming it Constantinople. It remained the capital of the subsequent BYZ-
ANTINE EMPIRE after the fall of Rome in the late 5th century. In the 6th–13th
centuries it was frequently besieged by Persians, Arabs, Bulgars, and
Russians. It was captured by the Fourth CRUSADE (1203) and turned over
to Latin Christian rule. It was returned to Byzantine rule in 1261. In 1453
it was captured by the OTTOMAN EMPIRE and made the Ottoman capital.
When the Republic of Turkey was founded in 1923, the capital was moved
to ANKARA, and Constantinople was officially renamed Istanbul in 1930.
Many of the city’s historic sites are located in the medieval walled city
(Stamboul). Among its architectural treasures are the HAGIA SOPHIA, the
Italian Popular Party (PPI) formerly (until 1993) Christian
Italian Socialist Party (PSI) since 1998 Italian Democratic
Italic
torial debut, The Funeral (1984), was acclaimed for its satire of social
conventions, a novelty in Japanese cinema. He became an international
success with his artful and entertaining Tampopo (1986) and A Taxing
Woman (1987). His satire on Japan’s crime syndicate, The Gangster’s
Moll (1992), provoked a near-deadly attack on him by gangsters.
Itanagar
Ivanov
ence for intercollegiate gridiron football dating to the 1870s. It consists
of HARVARD, YALE, PRINCETON, COLUMBIA, BROWN, and CORNELL universities, the
University of PENNSYLVANIA, and DARTMOUTH COLLEGE.
IWW See INDUSTRIAL WORKERS OF THE
WORLD
Izabal
Jabal al-Shaykh See Mount HERMON
Jabal River or Baer al-Jabal
972 I
Jackson, C. (cid:2) Jackson, R.
Jackson, Jesse (Louis) orig. Jesse Louis Burns (b. Oct. 8, 1941,
Greenville, S.C., U.S.) U.S. civil
rights leader. He became involved
with the CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT as a col-
lege student. In 1965 he went
Selma, Ala., to march with MARTIN
LUTHER KING, JR., and began working
for King’s SOUTHERN CHRISTIAN LEADER-
HAROLD WASHINGTON. In 1984 and
Jesse Jackson, 1988.
© DENNIS BRACK/BLACK STAR
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Jackson, Joe in full Joseph Jefferson Jackson known as Sho-
Mahalia Jackson, 1961.
THE BETTMANN ARCHIVE
Jackson, Reggie in full Reginald Martinez Jackson (b. May
Jackson, Stonewall orig. Thomas Jonathan Jackson (b. Jan.
YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK.
Jacob
Jacopo da Pontormo See Jacopo da PONTORMO
Jacopo della Quercia
Jaguaribe
sighted by CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS in 1494;
Spain colonized it in the early 16th century
but neglected it because it
lacked gold
reserves. Britain gained control in 1655,
and by the end of the 18th century Jamaica had become a prized colonial
possession because of the volume of sugar produced by slave labourers.
Slavery was abolished in the late 1830s, and the plantation system col-
lapsed. Jamaica gained full internal self-government in 1959 and became
an independent country within the British COMMONWEALTH in 1962. In the
late 20th century the government, led by MICHAEL MANLEY, nationalized
many businesses.
Jamaica Bay Inlet of the Atlantic Ocean. It occupies about 20 sq mi
(50 sq km) along the southwestern shore of LONG ISLAND, in southeastern
New York, U.S. Part of the Port of New York, it is sheltered on the south
by Rockaway Peninsula and connects with the ocean through Rockaway
Inlet. Near the entrance channel is CONEY ISLAND. On the northeastern
shore, at Idlewild, is the John F. Kennedy International Airport.
Jam)l al-Dln al-Afgh)nl
CHARLES SANDERS PEIRCE to assert that
the meaning of any idea must be ana-
lyzed in terms of the succession of
experiential consequences to which it
leads and that truth and error depend
solely on these consequences (see
PRAGMATISM). He applied this doctrine
to the analysis of change and chance,
freedom, variety, PLURALISM, and nov-
elty. His pragmatism was also the
basis for his polemic against MONISM,
the idealistic doctrine of internal rela-
tions, and all views that presented
reality as a static whole. He was also
a leader of the psychological move-
ment known as FUNCTIONALISM.
William James
COURTESY OF THE HARVARD UNIVERSITY NEWS SERVICE
James I Spanish Jaime known as James the Conqueror (b. Feb.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
James I (cid:2) James River
James Edward, the Old Pretender orig. James Francis
Edward Stuart (b. June 10, 1688, London, Eng.—d. Jan. 1, 1766,
Rome, Papal States) Claimant to the English and Scottish thrones. Son of
the exiled JAMES II of England, he was raised in France as a Catholic. On
the death of his father (1701), he was proclaimed king of England by the
French king LOUIS XIV, but the English Parliament passed a bill of attain-
der against him. He served with the French army in the War of the SPAN-
ISH SUCCESSION. In the JACOBITE uprising (1715), James landed in Scotland,
but within two months the uprising collapsed and he returned to France.
He lived thereafter in Rome under the pope’s patronage. He became
known as the “Old Pretender” to distinguish him from his son, CHARLES
EDWARD, THE YOUNG PRETENDER.
James the Conqueror See JAMES I (ARAGON)
James the Just See JAMES II (ARAGON)
the COLONIAL NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK.
Japanese crab See KING CRAB
Japurá
are HOKKAIDO, HONSHU,
TOMI HIDEYOSHI, and TOKUGAWA IEYASU. During the Edo (TOKUGAWA) period
University
of North Carolina
(Greensboro) from 1947 until his
death. As a critic, he revitalized the
reputations of ROBERT FROST, WALT
WHITMAN, and WILLIAM CARLOS WILL-
IAMS in the 1950s; his criticism is col-
lected in Poetry and the Age (1953),
A Sad Heart at
the Supermarket
(1962), and the posthumous Third
Book of Criticism (1969). His poems
appeared in Little Friend, Little
Friend (1945) and Losses (1948),
both drawing on his wartime experi-
ences, and such later collections as
The Seven-League Crutches (1951)
and The Woman at the Washington
Zoo (1960). He was killed when he
stepped in front of a moving car.
Jarrett, Keith (b. May 8, 1945,
Allentown, Pa., U.S.) U.S. JAZZ pia-
nist, composer, and bandleader. He
played with ART BLAKEY (1965–66) and
with Miles Davis’s jazz-rock group
(1970–71) before making a series of
solo recordings that won him broad
popularity. His trio (from 1966) with
bassist Charlie Haden (b. 1937) and
drummer Paul Motian (b. 1931), later
expanded to a quartet (1971–76), was
highly regarded. By the 1980s his
public
performance
turned
mainly to classical recitals.
Jarry
Jaspers
Jaxartes River See SYR DAR YA
Jaya, Mount
Jayavarman
Jellicoe, John Rushworth Jellicoe, 1st Earl (b. Dec. 5, 1859,
Jellinek
naut. In 1992 she spent more than a week aboard the space shuttle Endeav-
our. After leaving NASA in 1993, she taught environmental studies at
Dartmouth College.
jen See REN
Jena and Auerstedt
Jerusalem Hebrew Yerushalayim
mar, 7 vol. (1909–49), Language: Its Nature, Development, and Origin
(1922), and The Philosophy of Grammar (1924). He originated Novial,
an international language.
jester See FOOL
Jesuit
It is bordered by BIHAR, WEST BENGAL, ORISSA, CHHATTISGARH, and UTTAR
PRADESH states and occupies 28,833 sq mi (74,677 sq km); its capital is
Ranchi. The state lies mainly on the Chota Nagapur Plateau, a series of
plateaus, hills, and valleys. Many aboriginal peoples live there. The area
now constituting Jharkhand was a part of Bihar state after Indian inde-
pendence in 1947 until it was made into a separate state in 2000. It is rich
in minerals (notably copper), although most of the population is engaged
in agriculture.
Jhelum
campaign with which the French
army began operations
in 1914
against Germany, but he shifted his
forces and created a new French
army under his direct command that
won a great victory in the First Battle
of the MARNE (1914). As commander
in chief (1915–16), he ordered the
French armies to burst through the
German positions, at ruinous cost.
His prestige waned, and, because of
the lack of French preparation for the
Battle of VERDUN (1916), he was
stripped of his direct command and
resigned. He was created a marshal
of France in 1916.
Joffrey, Robert orig. Abdullah
Jaffa Bey Khan (b. Dec. 24,
J§gan
(1242) and supported a cultural revival from his capital at Nicaea, pav-
ing the way for the eventual reestablishment of the Byzantine Empire.
Venerated by his people, he was canonized in the Eastern church.
John III Sobieski
ports on the western African coast to supply slaves for Brazilian planta-
tions, and he led a Dutch army in 1665 in the ANGLO-DUTCH WARS.
John of Aviz See JOHN I (PORTUGAL)
John of Brienne
Johnson
994 I
Johnson, L. (cid:2) Johnson, W.
Johnson, Magic orig. Earvin Johnson, Jr. (b. Aug. 14, 1959,
ence of LUDWIG MIES VAN DER ROHE
Johnson, Rafer (Lewis)
Aug. 18, 1935, Hillsboro, Texas,
U.S.) U.S. decathlete. While a stu-
dent at UCLA, he won the decathlon
gold medal
the 1955 Pan-
Rafer Johnson, putting the shot in the
Olympic decathlon, 1960
AP/WIDE WORLD PHOTOS
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Johnson, Samuel known as Dr. Johnson (b. Sept. 18, 1709,
Johnson, Sir William, 1st Baronet (b. 1715, Smithtown, County
Johore
Jomini
Jones, Jim orig. James Warren Jones (b. May 13, 1931, near
Lynn, Ind., U.S.—d. Nov. 18, 1978, Jonestown, Guyana) U.S. leader of a
NEW RELIGOUS MOVEMENT. He became a preacher in Indianapolis. He estab-
lished the People’s Temple, which was affiliated with the Disciples of
Christ and opposed racism and poverty. The group moved to San Fran-
cisco in 1971. Accused of defrauding church members, Jones led his group
to Guyana in 1977 and set up the agricultural commune of Jonestown,
using threats and force to control his followers. In 1978 U.S. Congress-
man Leo Ryan went to Jonestown to investigate allegations against Jones.
Ryan and four others were killed when they reached the airport to return
to the U.S. In the aftermath, most of the Jonestown residents, in a mass
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Jones, E. (cid:2) Jones, W.
rite of murder-suicide, were shot or poisoned; Jones died of a gunshot
wound. The death toll was 913, including many children.
Jones, John Paul orig. John Paul (b. July 6, 1747, Kirkbean, Kirk-
cudbright, Scot.—d. July 18, 1792,
Paris, France) American naval hero.
He went to sea at age 12 and became
a ship’s master at age 21. He joined
his brother in Virginia in 1775. When
the AMERICAN REVOLUTION began, he
John Paul Jones, portrait by Charles
Willson Peale, 1781.
COURTESY OF THE INDEPENDENCE NATIONAL HISTORICAL
PARK COLLECTION, PHILADELPHIA
Jones, Mary Harris orig. Mary Harris known as Mother Jones
Jones, Quincy orig. Quincy Delight Jones, Jr. (b. March 14,
as COUNT BASIE, SARAH VAUGHAN, and DINAH WASHINGTON. In the early 1960s
Jones, Spike orig. Lindley Armstrong Jones (b. Dec. 14, 1911,
to encourage Asian studies and published scholarly works on Hindu and
Muslim law. His proposition (1786) that there was a common source for
languages ranging from Celtic to Sanskrit led to recognition of the INDO-
EUROPEAN LANGUAGE family.
jongleur
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Jordan (cid:2) Joséphine
Joseph II, Holy Roman emperor, detail
of a painting by Pompeo Batoni, 1769;
in the Kunsthistorisches Museum,
Vienna
COURTESY OF THE KUNSTHISTORISCHES MUSEUM, VIENNA
Joseph, Father orig. François-Joseph le Clerc du Tremblay
LEON’s brother JOSEPH BONAPARTE.
Joséphine orig. Marie-Josèphe-Rose Tascher de la Pagerie
(b. June 23, 1763, Trois Ilets, Mart.—d. May 29, 1814, Malmaison,
MARIE-LOUISE.
Josephus
Though the lances were blunted, knights were often seriously wounded or
killed. Tournaments were mounted only by royalty and nobility; ladies of
the court would sponsor individual knights, for whom jousting became a
ritual of COURTLY LOVE. Characterized by striking panoply and pageantry,
jousting tournaments represented the preeminent display of CHIVALR Y.
Jove See JUPITER
Joyce, James (Augustine Aloysius) (b. Feb. 2, 1882, Dublin,
Joyner, Florence Griffith See Florence GRIFFITH JOYNER
Joyner-Kersee, Jackie orig. Jacqueline Joyner (b. March 3,
Jubba River
through the application of pressure to arm joints or the neck. Judo is now
practiced primarily as sport. It became an Olympic sport in 1964; wom-
en’s judo was added in 1992. The sport evolved out of JUJITSU in late-19th-
century Japan.
juge d’instruction
of the SUPREME COURT. See also JUDGMENT, JUDICIAR Y, MAGISTRATE’S COURT, MIS-
SOURI PLAN.
DECLARATOR Y JUDGMENT; DEMURRER.
the SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES in MARBUR Y V. MADISON (1803). Sev-
eral constitutions drafted in Europe and Asia after World War II incorpo-
rated judicial review. Especially subject to scrutiny in the U.S. have been
actions bearing on civil rights (or CIVIL LIBERTY), DUE PROCESS of law, EQUAL
PROTECTION under the law, freedom of religion, FREEDOM OF SPEECH, and rights
of PRIVACY. See also CHECKS AND BALANCES.
land, and LEON TROTSKY and other leaders were jailed. The reorganized gov-
ernment was overthrown by the Bolsheviks in October.
July Plot or Rastenburg Assassination Plot Abortive attempt
Junayd
Julian, George W(ashing-
(b. May 5, 1817, Wayne
county, Ind., U.S.—d. July 7, 1899,
Irvington, Ind.) U.S. politician. He
was admitted to the bar in 1840 and
practiced law in several
Indiana
towns. By the mid-1840s he was a
Whig member of the Indiana state
legislature and a frequent author of
antislavery
newspaper
articles.
Elected to the U.S. House of Repre-
sentatives as a member of the FREE
SOIL PARTY in 1848, he was that par-
ty’s vice-presidential candidate in
1852. In 1856 he helped form the REPUBLICAN PARTY. Again serving in the
House (1861–71), he played an important role in making emancipation a
Northern war aim in the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR. In 1867 he helped prepare
articles of impeachment against Pres. ANDREW JOHNSON. He later wrote
books and articles on reform causes, including women’s suffrage.
Julian Alps Range of the eastern ALPS. It extends southeast from the Car-
nic Alps in northeastern Italy to the city of LJUBLJANA, Slvn. The highest peak
is Triglav (9,396 ft [2,864 m]), also the highest point in Slovenia.
Julian of Norwich or Juliana of Norwich (b. 1342, probably
Norwich, Norfolk, Eng.—d. after 1416) English mystic. After being
healed of a serious illness (1373), she wrote two accounts of her visions;
her Revelations of Divine Love is remarkable for its clarity, beauty, and
profundity. She spent her later life as a recluse in Norwich.
Juliana (Louise Emma Marie Wilhelmina) (b. April 30, 1909,
Juneau
Jupiter Dolichenus
Jutland Danish Jylland
Justinian I orig. Petrus Sabbatius (b. 483, Tauresium,
K2 or Dapsang
act as intermediaries between humans and the gods. Each tribe has its
own kachinas, which are believed to reside with a tribe for half of each
year. They can be seen by the community if men properly perform a ritual
while wearing kachina masks. The spirit depicted on the mask is thought
to be actually present with the performer, temporarily transforming him.
Kachinas are also represented by small wooden dolls, carved and deco-
rated by the men of the tribe.
Kaczynski
east, it forms the boundary between Tanzania and Uganda before empty-
ing into Lake Victoria. It is about 250 mi (400 km) long.
kagura
Kalacuri
death, violence, sexuality, and, paradoxically, with motherly love. Noted
for killing the demon Raktavija, she is usually depicted as a hideous,
black-faced hag smeared with blood. In her four hands she holds, vari-
ously, a sword, a shield, the severed head of a giant, or a noose for stran-
gling. Nearly naked, she wears a garland of skulls and a girdle of severed
hands. She is often shown standing or dancing on her husband, SHIVA. Until
the 19th century the thugs of India worshiped Kali and offered their vic-
tims to her. In the late 20th century she became a symbol of feminine
empowerment in some circles.
Kalidasa
islands. A popular and benevolent ruler, he improved harbours to accom-
modate Hawaii’s growing whaling industry and provided free medical care
for Hawaiians. He resolutely opposed the annexation of Hawaii by the U.S.
Kamenev
Kanem-Bornu
the castles of the day. Chinese-style ink painting was blended with poly-
chromatic Yamato-e (“Japanese painting”); some artists used a back-
ground of gold leaf for even more striking effects.
Kanphata Yogi Member of an order of religious ascetics that vener-
ate the Hindu god SHIVA. They are followers of Gorakhnath, a master yogi
of the 12th century or earlier. Their ideology incorporates elements of
magic, mysticism, and alchemy absorbed from both Hindu and Buddhist
esoteric systems. Members focus on acquiring supernatural powers rather
than following the more orthodox practices of meditation and devotion.
They are distinguished by large earrings worn in the hollow of the ear.
Kanpur
kaolinite
ing with the Vienna Philharmonic, the start of a legacy of some 800
recordings. His U.S. debut in 1955 was attended by controversy over his
Nazi-era activities. That same year he became WILHELM FURTWÄNGLER’s suc-
cessor at the Berlin Philharmonic, and he headed the Salzburg Festival
from 1964 until his death.
Karak See KAYA
Karakoram Range Mountain system, south-central Asia. Extending
300 mi (480 km) from eastern Afghanistan to the KASHMIR region, it is one
of the highest mountain systems in the world; its loftiest peak is K2, at
28,251 ft (8,611 m), the world’s second highest peak. Surrounded by other
steep mountain ranges,
the Karakorams are virtually inaccessible,
although the completion of the Karakoram Highway in 1978 improved
transportation in the region. Because of the harsh environment, the area
is thinly populated.
Karakorum
Karlovy Vary
K)r)n
of the earliest HAUSA states, and an ancient centre of learning. The city’s
Fulani emirs retain traditional and advisory roles. It is a market for local
agricultural products as well as a centre for traditional crafts and indus-
Katsura
Kawasaki
minister. The area came under Mongol rule in the 13th century. The Ka-
zakhs consolidated a nomadic empire in the 15th–16th century. Under
Russian rule by the mid-19th century, it became part of the Kirgiz Autono-
mous Republic formed by the Soviets in 1920, and in 1925 its name was
changed to the Kazakh Autonomous S.S.R. Kazakhstan obtained its inde-
pendence from the Soviet Union in 1991. After several years of economic
troubles, it began a period of sustained growth.
Kazan
Kediri
Kellogg-Briand Pact
play, touched on many subjects, especially current affairs. Excepting two
periods when he left the Post, he continued there until 1981; thereafter
he wrote for Newsday, winning a Pulitzer Prize in 1985. His books include
Part of Our Time (1955), on 1930s radical movements in the U.S.; and
The Briar Patch (1973, National Book Award), on New York’s prosecu-
tion of the Black Panthers.
Kenai
1026 I Kennedy (cid:2) Kenya
Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts Huge cultural com-
Kent, Earl of See ODO OF BAYEUX
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
JOMO KENYATTA was
Kenyatta
his government. He went into hiding, then emigrated to western Europe
in 1918. In 1940 he moved to the U.S., where he lectured at universities
and wrote books on the revolution.
Kerguelen
chief of the German air staff in 1936 and commanded early air attacks on
Poland, France, Britain, and the Soviet Union. In 1941 he was appointed
commander in chief, south, to bolster Italy’s efforts in North Africa and
against Malta. He codirected the Axis campaign in North Africa with
ERWIN ROMMEL. After the Allied invasions of Sicily and Italy in 1943, he
fought an effective defensive action that prevented an Allied victory in
that theatre until 1944. Appointed commander in chief, west, in 1945, he
was unable to stop the Allies’ drive into Germany and surrendered the
southern half of the German forces in May 1945. He was imprisoned for
war crimes (1947–52).
kestrel
KGB Russian Komitet Gosudarstvennoy Bezopasnosti
Kh)b)r
headed the Islamic Centre Hamburg in Germany during the Iranian Revo-
lution (1979) and returned home to seek election to the Majles (parlia-
ment) in 1980. He served in government posts during the IRAN-IRAQ WAR
(1980–90), as cultural adviser to Pres. Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, and
as head of the National Library (1992–97) before winning the presidency
on a platform of social and economic reform. He was reelected by an
overwhelming margin in 2001.
Khayr al-Dln See BARBAROSSA
Khayyam, Omar See OMAR KHAYYAM
Khazar
Khorram-dln)n
kibbutz
slav’s death in 1054, his sons divided the empire into warring factions.
The 13th-century MONGOL conquest decisively ended its power.
Kigali
guese in the 16th century, it declined in importance and was abandoned.
Extensive ruins remain, including those of mosques, a Portuguese fort,
and a 13th–14th-century palace. The town of Kilwa on the Tanzanian
coast was the site of a major centre for the export of slaves in the 19th
century.
Kim Dae Jung
Since the 17th century the power held by monarchs, particularly those in
western Europe, has been widely regarded as deriving from the people.
See also CONSTITUTIONAL MONARCHY; KHAN; MONARCHY; PHARAOH; TSAR.
COURTESY OF SIDNEY A. SEIDENBERG, INC.
B.B. King, 1972.
King, Billie Jean orig. Billie Jean Moffitt (b. Nov. 22, 1943, Long
Billie Jean King.
COLORSPORT
King, Larry orig. Lawrence Harvey Zeiger (b. Nov. 19, 1933,
Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.) U.S. talk-show host. He worked in Miami, Fla., as
a radio disc jockey, talk-show host, and freelance broadcaster and writer
(1957–78). He hosted the popular national radio talk show The Larry King
Show (1978–94) and, since 1985, the television talk show Larry King Live
on CNN. Known for his easygoing interviewing style with celebrities,
news makers, and world leaders, he conducted more than 30,000 inter-
views on his two shows.
King, Martin Luther, Jr. (b. Jan. 15, 1929, Atlanta, Ga., U.S.—d.
April 4, 1968, Memphis, Tenn.) U.S.
civil-rights
leader. The son and
grandson of Baptist preachers, King
became an adherent of nonviolence
while in college. Ordained a Baptist
minister himself in 1954, he became
pastor of a church in Montgomery,
Ala.; the following year he received
a doctorate from Boston University.
He was selected to head the Mont-
gomery Improvement Association,
whose boycott efforts eventually
ended the city’s policies of RACIAL SEG-
REGATION on public transportation. In
1957 he formed the SOUTHERN CHRIS-
Martin Luther King, Jr.
JULIAN WASSER
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
King (cid:2) king crab
King, W(illiam) L(yon) Mackenzie (b. Dec. 17, 1874, Berlin, Ont.,
king crab or Alaskan king crab or Japanese crab Marine
DECAPOD (Paralithodes camtschatica), an edible CRAB. It is found in the
shallow waters off Japan and along the Alaska coast; it also inhabits the
1038 I King George Sound (cid:2) Kingston upon Hull
AND INDIAN WAR.
Common king snake (Lampropeltis get-
ula).
JACK DERMID
kingdom of God or kingdom of heaven In CHRISTIANITY, the spiri-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Kingston, Maxine Hong orig. Maxine Hong (b. Oct. 27, 1940,
Kingstown Capital (pop., 1999 est.: 16,175), chief port of SAINT VIN-
CENT AND THE GRENADINES, West Indies. Located on the southwestern end of
Saint Vincent island, it overlooks Kingstown Harbour. Its sites of interest
include the Botanic Gardens (founded 1763), the oldest of its kind in the
Western Hemisphere; Capt. WILLIAM BLIGH made his 1787 voyage on the
Bounty to obtain breadfruit trees from TAHITI for this garden.
Kinnock, Neil (Gordon) (b. March 28, 1942, Tredegar, Monmouth-
shire, Wales) British politician. Elected to Parliament in 1970, he rose in
the LABOUR PARTY ranks and was named to its national executive commit-
tee in 1978. After the party suffered its heaviest defeat in 48 years in 1983,
he was elected party leader, the youngest in its history. By 1989 he had
persuaded the party to abandon its radical policies on disarmament and
large-scale nationalization. Although the party increased its numbers in
Parliament, it lost the 1992 general election to the Conservatives, and
Kinnock resigned as party leader. He became a vice president of the
European Commission of the European Union in 1999.
Kinsey
Kiriwina Islands See TROBRIAND ISLANDS
Kirov
Kitaky)sh)
doubled as community centres for religious activities. The Klamath’s
closely related neighbours were the MODOC. Together with the Modoc and
the Yahooskin band of Snake Indians, they form an entity known as the
Klamath Tribes. Some 2,700 people claimed sole Klamath descent in the
2000 U.S. census.
Klamath
ANDROGENs.
GIORGIO DE CHIRICO.
Kluane
theory Mathematical
theory of closed curves
in three-
dimensional space. The number of times and the manner in which a curve
crosses itself distinguish different KNOTs. The fewest possible crossings is
three, for the overhand (trefoil) knot, which occurs in two mirror versions
according to the directions in which the curve crosses itself. Knot theory
has been used to understand both atomic and molecular structures (pro-
tein folding).
Know-Nothing Party or American Party U.S. political party of
Knowles
and honours, including the Kyoto Prize (1996), the Turing Award (1974),
and the National Medal of Science (1979).
Ko Hung See GE HONG
communism in the essay collection The God That Failed (1949). His later
works, mostly concerning science and philosophy, include The Act of
Creation (1964) and The Ghost in the Machine (1967). Suffering from
leukemia and Parkinson’s disease and believing in voluntary euthanasia,
he died with his wife in a suicide pact.
Kogury£
Kolbe
dig a burrow as deep as 30 ft (9 m). Carrion is their main diet, but adults
may eat smaller Komodos. They can run swiftly and occasionally attack
and kill humans.
Komsomol
Koran See QUR#0N
Korda, Sir Alexander orig. Sándor Laszlo Kellner (b. Sept. 16,
Kordofan
Kornilov
Korsakov, Nicolay Rimsky- See Nicolay RIMSKY-KORSAKOV
Kory£
Kotzebue
important in the economy of the process. In modern kraft mills, opera-
tions are completely contained; waste streams are recycled and reused,
eliminating water pollution.
Krakatoa
Krishnamurti
Kruger, Paul orig. Stephanus Johannes Paulus Kruger (b.
Krupp
Kuan Han-ch’ing See GUAN HANQING
Kuan-yin See AVALOKITESVARA
Kuan Yü See GUAN YU
Kuang-chou See GUANGZHOU
Kuang-wu ti See GUANGWUDI
Kuban River
Kulturkampf
Kuo Hsiang See GUO XIANG
Kuo Mo-jo See GUO MORUO
Kuomintang See NATIONALIST PARTY
Kuusinen
Kwangju
region in ancient times. They were conquered by GENGHIS KHAN’s son Jöchi
in 1207. The area became part of the Qing dynasty of China in the mid-
18th century. It came under Russian control in the 19th century, and its
long rebellion against Russia (and later the Soviet Union) that began in
1916 resulted in a long period of brutal repression. Kirgiziya became an
autonomous province of the Soviet Union in 1924 and was made the Kir-
giz S.S.R. in 1936. Kyrgyzstan gained independence in 1991. It subse-
quently struggled with creating a democratic process and with establishing
a stable economy.
Kyushu Island (pop., 2001 est.: 13,454,000), southernmost of Japan’s
four main islands. Located off the eastern coast of Asia, it is separated
from HONSHU to the north by the Shimonoseki Strait and from SHIKOKU to
Kyzylkum
La Brea
La Rioja
Labov
ber of instruments and procedures to study, systematize, or quantify the
objects of their attention. Procedures often include sampling, pretreatment
and treatment, measurement, calculation, and presentation of results; each
may be carried out by techniques ranging from having an unaided person
use crude tools to running an automated analysis system with computer
controls, data storage, and elaborate readouts.
labour In economics, the general body of wage earners. In CLASSICAL ECO-
NOMICS, labour is one of the three factors of production, along with CAPITAL
and LAND. Labour can also be used to describe work performed, including
any valuable service rendered by a human agent in the production of
wealth, other than accumulating and providing capital. Labour is per-
formed for the sake of its product or, in modern economic life, for the
sake of a share of the aggregate product of the community’s industry. The
price per unit of time, or wage rate, commanded by a particular kind of
labour in the MARKET depends on a number of variables, such as the tech-
nical efficiency of the worker, the demand for that person’s particular
skills, and the supply of similarly skilled workers. Other variables include
training, experience, intelligence, social status, prospects for advance-
ment, and relative difficulty of the work. All these factors make it impos-
sible for economists to assign a standard value to labour. Instead,
economists often quantify labour hours according to the quantity and
value of the goods or services produced.
labour See PARTURITION
See also ARBITRATION; MEDIATION.
sance on, labyrinths or mazes consisting of intricate paths separated by
high hedges were a feature of formal gardens.
Lacan
lactobacillus
within Russia. During the Siege of LENINGRAD (1941–44) in World War II,
the lake was the lifeline that connected the city with the rest of the Soviet
Union.
Ladrone Islands See MARIANA ISLANDS
Laemmle
now in southeastern Iraq. Excava-
tions have uncovered palace and
temple ruins as well as CUNEIFORM
texts that provide information about
Sumer in the 3rd millennium BC.
Founded in the Ubaid period (c.
5200–c. 3500 BC), it came under the
control of SARGON of Akkad. It later
prospered under Gudea, a governor
nominally subject to the Guti. It was
occupied as late as the Parthian era
(247 BC–AD 224).
Lågen River
ton’s Furnace, Bergen Iron Works, and Bricksburg. It is now a popular
resort and recreation area, and its population has tripled since the 1960s.
Lakshadweep
Lake Clark National Park and Preserve National park, south-
lake trout or Mackinaw trout or Great Lakes trout or
Lamarck
present-day Thailand; its capital was the city of Chiang Mai. Lan Na was
a powerful state and a centre for the spread of THERAVADA Buddhism. Under
Tilokaracha (r. 1441–87) it was famous for its Buddhist scholarship and
literature. It remained independent until it was conquered by Myanmar
(Burma) in the 16th century. The Siamese did not reassert control over
the area until the 19th century.
Lan Sang
ants. Other goals include improving the social status of peasants and
coordinating agricultural production with industrialization programs. The
earliest record of land reform is from 6th-century-BC Athens, where SOLON
abolished the debt system that forced peasants to mortgage their land and
labour. The concentration of land in the hands of large landowners became
the rule in the ancient world, however, and remained so through the
Middle Ages and the Renaissance. The FRENCH REVOLUTION brought land
reform to France and established the small family farm as the cornerstone
of French democracy. SERFDOM was abolished throughout most of Europe
in the 19th century. The Russian serfs were emancipated in 1861, and the
RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1917 introduced collectivization of agriculture,
attended by loss of capital and devastating famines. Land reform was
instituted in a number of other countries where communists came to
power, notably China. It remains a potent political issue in many parts of
the world. See also ABSENTEE OWNERSHIP.
land tenure, feudal See FEUDAL LAND TENURE
Landau
Lanfranc
Languedoc
Langtry, Lillie orig. Emilie Charlotte Le Breton (b. Oct. 13, 1853,
SIAN, DRAVIDIAN, ALTAIC, and AUSTROASIATIC; in Africa, NIGER-CONGO, AFRO-
lanthanide
Lapita culture
(1931–33). After the POPULAR FRONT’s election victory in 1936, he became
prime minister and tried to unify the leftist parties; however, an extreme-
left uprising in Barcelona in 1937 during the SPANISH CIVIL WAR caused a
cabinet crisis and he was forced to resign. He went into exile in France
and was interned by the Germans in World War II (1942–45).
Laristan
See also BLACK LEGEND.
Las Navas de Tolosa
Lassus
nence. See also individual artists by name, such as FRIDA KAHLO; OSCAR
NIEMEYER; and DIEGO RIVERA; and authors by name, such as JORGE LUIS BORGES;
Gabriel GARCÍA MÁRQUEZ; and PABLO NERUDA.
Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) formerly (until
1980) Latin American Free Trade Association (LAFTA) Inter-
latite
styles—including ROMANTICISM, NEOCLASSICISM, MODERNISM, and POSTMOD-
was active as an engineer, especially in the design of waterworks. He is
widely regarded as having established architecture as a profession in the
Latter-day Saints, Church of Jesus Christ of See MORMON
lattice, crystal See CR YSTAL LATTICE
Lattre de Tassigny
lauma
cated unity between English and French Canadians, development of the
western territories, protection of Canadian industry, and expansion of the
transportation system. His insistence on protecting Canadian autonomy in
its relations with Britain helped shape the modern concept of a British
Commonwealth of independent states. His support for a treaty of reciproc-
ity with the U.S. contributed to his government’s defeat in 1911. Laurier
is remembered as one of Canada’s most outstanding statesmen.
Lausanne
1084 I
Law (cid:2) Lawrence
law, philosophy of See JURISPRUDENCE
LAW; GERMAN CIVIL CODE.
sin A
sin B
sin C
lawn bowls See BOWLS
Lawrence, D(avid) H(erbert) (b. Sept. 11, 1885, Eastwood, Not-
tinghamshire, Eng.—d. March 2, 1930, Vence, France) English novelist,
short-story writer, poet, and essayist. The son of a Midlands coal miner
and an educated mother, he began to write in 1905 and earned a teaching
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Lawrence, Gertrude orig. Gertrud Alexandra Dagmar
Lawrence Klasen (b. July 4,
1898, London, Eng.—d. Sept. 6,
1952, New York, N.Y., U.S.) British
actress. She began appearing on
stage as a child, and she starred in
musical revues such as NOËL COW-
ARD’s London Calling (1923) and
GEORGE GERSHWIN’s Oh, Kay! (1926).
A longtime friend of Coward’s, she
performed in many of his comedies,
notably Private Lives (1930); both
the play and the stars set the tone that
would characterize
comedies of
manners for a decade or more:
sophistication, brittle wit, and chic.
She was also acclaimed for her roles
in the musicals Lady in the Dark
(1941) and The King and I (1951).
Lawrence, Jacob (b. Sept. 7,
CECIL BEATON
Gertrude Lawrence
Lawrence, John (Laird Mair) later Baron Lawrence (of the
Punjab and of Grately) (b. March 4, 1811, Richmond, Yorkshire,
Eng.—d. June 27, 1879, London) British viceroy and governor-general of
India (1864–69). He worked in Delhi as an assistant judge, magistrate,
and tax collector. After the First SIKH WAR (1845–46) he was made com-
missioner of the newly annexed district of Jullundur, where he subdued
the hill chiefs, established courts and police posts, and curbed female
infanticide and suttee. On the Punjab board of administration he abolished
internal duties, introduced a uniform currency, and encouraged road and
canal construction. As viceroy and governor-general from 1864, he pro-
moted increased educational opportunities for Indians but resisted their
appointment to high civil-service posts. He avoided entanglements in the
affairs of Arabia, the Persian Gulf, and Afghanistan.
Lawrence, Saint or Saint Laurence (d. 258, Rome; feast day
August 10) Roman martyr. He was one of seven deacons in Rome dur-
ing the papacy of Sixtus II. When the pope was executed during the per-
secution of Christians under Valerian, the authorities asked Lawrence to
surrender the churches’ treasures to the state, and he responded by dis-
tributing the money to the poor, for which he was condemned to death.
His fearless behavior at his execution was responsible for many conver-
sions; according to one legend, he was roasted to death on a gridiron,
remarking to his torturers, “I am cooked on that side; turn me over, and
eat.”
Lawrence, T(homas) E(dward) byname Lawrence of Arabia
Laxness
Le Carré
Leacock (cid:2) leaf insect
Leacock, photograph by Yousuf Karsh
ELEMENT,
© KARSH FROM RAPHO/PHOTO RESEARCHERS—EB INC.
lead glance See GALENA
lead poisoning or plumbism Poisoning by accumulation of LEAD in
the body. Large doses cause gastroenteritis in adults and brain disorders
in children. Anemia, constipation and abdominal spasm, confusion, a pro-
gressive paralysis, and sometimes brain cancer result from chronic expo-
sure. Children are particularly susceptible to nerve and brain damage;
sensitive tests show that even low levels of lead can harm children and
are linked to behavioral problems. Sources in the home include lead-based
paint, lead drinking-water pipes, and lead-glazed tableware. Babies, who
put things in their mouths, are at highest risk. Working where lead is used
and exposure to some insecticides are other risk factors. The U.S. phase-
out of lead in gasoline was completed in 1996; similar bans are being
implemented worldwide. Treatment involves giving ANTIDOTES that bind
(see CHELATE) the lead in the tissues.
Leadbelly orig. Huddie William Ledbetter (b. c. Jan. 21, 1885?,
Mooringsport, La., U.S.—d. Dec. 6, 1949, New York, N.Y.) U.S. folk
blues singer and songwriter. As a child he learned to play many instru-
ments; he later worked as an itinerant musician with Blind Lemon Jef-
ferson. In 1918 he was imprisoned for murder; he was pardoned in 1925
by the governor of Texas, who had visited the prison and heard him sing.
Resuming a life of drifting, he was imprisoned for attempted murder in
Structures of a leaf. The epidermis is often covered with a waxy protective cuticle
that helps prevent water loss from inside the leaf. Oxygen, carbon dioxide, and
water enter and exit the leaf through pores (stomata) scattered mostly along the
lower epidermis. The stomata are opened and closed by the contraction and
expansion of surrounding guard cells. The vascular, or conducting, tissues are
known as xylem and phloem; water and minerals travel up to the leaves from the
roots through the xylem, and sugars made by photosynthesis are transported to
other parts of the plant through the phloem. Photosynthesis occurs within the
chloroplast-containing mesophyll layer.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
leaf-footed bug See SQUASH BUG
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
leaf miner Any of various insect larvae that live and feed within a leaf,
including CATERPILLARS, SAWFLY larvae, BEETLE and WEEVIL grubs, and DIPTERAN
maggots. Most leaf-miner burrows or tunnels are either thin, winding,
whitish trails or broad, whitish or brownish blotches. Though leaf miners
do not usually cause injury, they mar the appearance of ornamental trees
and shrubs. One method of control is to remove and burn infested leaves;
spraying with nicotine solutions or dusting with insecticides is effective
only when the adults are emerging.
leafhopper Any of the small, slender, often beautifully coloured and
marked sap-sucking insects of the
large family Cicadellidae. There is a
leafhopper species for almost every
type of plant. Most are less than 0.5
in. (12 mm) long. Leafhoppers can
be serious economic pests. Their
feeding may remove sap, destroy
chlorophyll, transmit disease, or curl
leaves; they also puncture the host
plant while laying eggs. Hopperburn
is a diseased condition caused by
their injection of a toxin into the
plant as they feed.
League of Arab States See
ARAB LEAGUE
Leahy
such as EDWARD C. TOLMAN, claimed they were overly reductive and ignored
a subject’s inner activities. GESTALT-PSYCHOLOGY researchers drew attention
to the importance of pattern and form in perception and learning, while
structural linguists argued that language learning was grounded in a geneti-
cally inherited “grammar.” Developmental psychologists such as JEAN
PIAGET highlighted stages of growth in learning. More recently, cognitive
scientists have explored learning as a form of INFORMATION PROCESSING, while
some brain researchers, such as GERALD MAURICE EDELMAN, have proposed
that thinking and learning involve an ongoing process of cerebral pathway
building. Related topics of research include ATTENTION, COMPREHENSION, MOTI-
VATION, and transfer of TRAINING. See also BEHAVIOUR GENETICS; BEHAVIOURISM;
EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY; IMPRINTING; INSTINCT; INTELLIGENCE.
Leavis
Lebanon Mountains Arabic Jabal Lubn)n
Lee Teng-hui
Lee, Peggy orig. Norma Deloris Egstrom (b. May 26, 1920,
Lee, Robert E(dward) (b. Jan.
19, 1807, Stratford, Westmoreland
county, Va., U.S.—d. Oct. 12, 1870,
Lexington, Va.) U.S. and Confeder-
ate military leader. He was the son of
HENR Y LEE. After graduating from
West Point, he served in the engi-
neering corps and in the Mexican
War under WINFIELD SCOTT. He trans-
ferred to the cavalry in 1855 and
commanded frontier forces in Texas
(1856–57).
In 1859 he led U.S.
troops against the slave insurrection
attempted by JOHN BROWN at Harpers
Ferry. In 1861 he was offered com-
mand of a new army being formed
Leeuwenhoek
Highest-ranking order and decoration of the French republic. It was cre-
ated by NAPOLEON in 1802 as a general military and civil order of merit.
Membership is open to men and women, French citizens and foreigners,
irrespective of rank, birth, or religion. Admission into the Legion requires
20 years of civil achievement in peacetime or extraordinary military brav-
ery and service in times of war.
Legion of Mary Church See MARIA LEGIO
legislative apportionment or legislative delimitation Pro-
DERING, PROPORTIONAL REPRESENTATION.
THE UNITED STATES; DIET; DUMA; EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT; KNESSET; Canadian PAR-
LIAMENT.
legume
on the River Soar, it was settled by Romans. A considerable community
by Norman times, it was the site of a Norman castle and abbey built in
1143, the ruins of which still stand. King RICHARD III was killed near Leices-
ter in the Battle of BOSWORTH FIELD (1485). It was incorporated in 1589 and
became an industrial centre after the arrival of the railway in 1832. The
University of Leicester (founded 1957) is nearby.
Leicester, Earl of See Simon de MONTFORT
Leicester
Leizhou
1096 I
length, area, and volume (cid:2) Leo I
Lenin, Vladimir (Ilich) orig. Vladimir Ilich Ulyanov (b. April
STALINISM, TOTALITARIANISM.
Lenni Lenape See DELAWARE
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
and the VANDALS not to sack the city (455). Leo was also an exponent of the
precept of papal primacy, and his personal example and letters and sermons
contributed greatly to the growth of papal authority.
Leo III known as Leo the Isaurian
cess, but its libretto attracted the interest of the publisher Giulio Ricordi.
GIACOMO PUCCINI’s rejection of Leoncavallo’s help with Manon Lescaut
and Ricordi’s rejection of his own projects caused him in anger to write
the verismo one-act opera Pagliacci (1892) for Ricordi’s rival. Though
he wrote several other operas and operettas, Pagliacci was his only endur-
ing success.
Leone
termed enlightened despotism, he built an efficient state government and
encouraged representative institutions. In 1790 he succeeded his brother
JOSEPH II as emperor and retained many of Joseph’s reforms. In 1792 he
allied with Prussia against revolutionary France, precipitating the FRENCH
REVOLUTIONAR Y WARS.
Leopold III orig. Léopold-Philippe-Charles-Albert-Meinrad-
Hubertus-Marie-Miguel (b. Nov. 3, 1901, Brussels, Belg.—d. Sept.
25, 1983, Brussels) King of the Belgians (1934–51). He succeeded his
father, ALBERT I, and favoured an independent foreign policy but not strict
neutrality. In World War II he assumed command of the Belgian army, but
he surrendered his encircled forces 18 days after the German invasion in
May 1940. The Belgian government repudiated his decision to surrender
and remain with his forces rather than join the government-in-exile in
London. Under house arrest through the war, he later went to Switzerland
(1945–50) to await resolution of the controversy. Though 58% of voters
voted for his return to the throne, he abdicated in 1951 in favour of his
son BAUDOUIN.
Leopold of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen
Lesage
mohair). Industries focus mainly on light manufacturing (textiles and
apparel, furniture, jewelry). Lesotho is a constitutional monarchy with two
legislative houses; its chief of state is the king, and the head of govern-
ment is the prime minister. Bantu-speaking farmers began to settle the
area in the 16th century, and a number of chiefdoms arose. The most
powerful of them organized the Basotho in 1824 and obtained British
protection in 1843 as tension between the Basotho and the South African
Boers increased. It became a British territory in 1868 and was annexed
to the Cape Colony in 1871. The colony’s effort to disarm the Basotho
resulted in revolt in 1880, and four years later it separated from the colony
and became a British High Commission Territory. It became independent
in 1966. A new constitution, effective in 1993, ended seven years of mili-
tary rule. At the beginning of the 21st century, Lesotho suffered from
internal political problems and a deteriorating economy.
Lesse River
Leucothea
Levine
1104 I
Lewis, C. (cid:2) Lewis, S.
is also a possibility of error. His position in epistemology represents a
synthesis of EMPIRICISM and PRAGMATISM.
of the IDENTITY THEOR Y in the PHILOSOPHY OF MIND (see also MIND-BODY PROBLEM);
ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Lewis, John L(lewellyn) (b. Feb. 12, 1880, near Lucas, Iowa,
U.S.—d. June 11, 1969, Washington,
D.C.) U.S. labour leader. The son of
Welsh immigrants, he became a coal
miner at age 15. He rose through the
ranks of the UNITED MINE WORKERS OF
AMERICA (UMWA) and from 1911
was also an organizer of the Ameri-
can Federation of Labor (AFL), with
which the miners’ union was affili-
ated. As president of the UMWA
(1920–60), Lewis
joined several
other AFL union leaders in forming
the Committee for Industrial Organi-
zation (1935) to organize workers in
mass-production
industries. On
breaking with the AFL (see AFL-
CIO), Lewis and other dissident
union heads founded the Congress of
Industrial Organizations. As
president (1936–40), Lewis presided
over the often-violent struggle to
introduce unionism into previously unorganized industries such as steel
John L. Lewis, 1963
AP/WIDE WORLD PHOTOS
and automobiles. See also WILLIAM GREEN; LABOUR UNION; PHILIP MURRAY.
Lewis, Lennox in full Lennox Claudius Lewis (b. Sept. 2, 1965,
Lewis, (Harry) Sinclair (b. Feb.
1885, Sauk Center, Minn.,
U.S.—d. Jan. 10, 1951, near Rome,
Italy) U.S. novelist and social critic.
He worked as a reporter and maga-
zine writer before making his literary
reputation with Main Street (1920),
Sinclair Lewis.
THE GRANGER COLLECTION, NEW YORK
Lexington and Concord, Battles of (April 19, 1775) Initial skir-
Leyden, Lucas van See LUCAS VAN LEYDEN
Leyster
Li Zicheng
1108 I
Liberal Party of Canada (cid:2) libertarianism
SAINT LAURENT, LESTER PEARSON, PIERRE TRUDEAU, and JEAN CHRÉTIEN. Like the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam or Tamil Tigers Guerrilla
organization seeking to establish an independent Tamil state in northern
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
HENR Y DAVID THOREAU and AYN RAND.
(see HUNKERS AND BARNBURNERS) to form the FREE SOIL PARTY.
libido
Licchavi
labourers of Germany and The Netherlands. As a supporter of such aca-
demically unpopular styles as Impressionism and ART NOUVEAU, he
founded the Berlin SEZESSION (1899) but later became president of the
conservative Berlin Academy.
Liebig
Liezi or Lieh-tzu
lightning bug See FIREFLY
lignin
optic communications systems. LEDs are formed by the so-called III-V
compound semiconductors related to gallium arsenide. They consume
little power and are long-lasting and inexpensive.
light fixture See LUMINAIRE
light quantum See PHOTON
light-year Distance traveled by LIGHT moving in a vacuum in one year,
at its accepted speed of 186,282 mi/second (299,792 km/second). It equals
about 5.9 trillion mi (9.5 trillion km), 63,240 ASTRONOMICAL UNITs, or 0.307
PARSEC.
Lightfoot, Gordon (b. Nov. 17, 1938, Orillia, Ont., Can.) Canadian
singer and songwriter. He began writing folk-oriented pop singles in the
mid-1960s, including “Early Morning Rain” and “Ribbon of Darkness.”
His later hits include “If You Could Read My Mind” and “The Wreck of
the Edmund Fitzgerald.” His songs have been covered by singers rang-
ing from BARBRA STREISAND to JERR Y LEE LEWIS.
mainly either INCANDESCENT LAMPS or FLUORESCENT LAMPS and often depends
Liliuokalani
Limbourg
DORIS HUMPHREY and CHARLES WEIDMAN
limonite
support of POPULAR SOVEREIGNTY and the KANSAS-NEBRASKA ACT, while Dou-
PARTY.
Lincolnshire
BOOTH.
Lincoln, Benjamin (b. Jan. 24, 1733, Hingham, Mass.—d. May 9,
1810, Boston) American Revolutionary officer. After serving in the Mas-
sachusetts militia (1755–76), he was appointed major general in the Con-
tinental Army. As commander of forces in the South in 1780, he was
forced to surrender with 7,000 troops after the British victory at Charles-
ton, S.C. Released in a prisoner exchange, he served in the Yorktown
campaign in 1781. From 1781 to 1783 he served as secretary of war, and
in 1787 he commanded the militia forces that suppressed SHAYS’ REBELLION.
From 1789 to 1809 he was collector for the port of Boston.
Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts Travertine-clad cultural
1118 I
Lindisfarne Gospels (cid:2) linga
KELLS.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
including the FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS and the MEAN-VALUE THEOREM
Lingayat
them, BINOMIAL NOMENCLATURE. Linnae-
Linotype
cholesterol from the liver, where it is made, to the cells, where it is used;
high-density lipoproteins (HDLs) may carry excess cholesterol back to
the liver for breakdown and excretion. LDL-bound cholesterol is prima-
rily responsible for deposits in arteries (see ARTERIOSCLEROSIS) that can lead
to CORONAR Y HEART DISEASE, ANGINA PECTORIS, MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION, or STROKE.
HDL does not form such deposits and may actually retard or reduce their
buildup.
Lippe
liquor See DISTILLED LIQUOR
Liri River
cal factions (see DECONSTRUCTION; POSTSTRUCTURALISM; STRUCTURALISM).
BIPOLAR DISORDER.
litho-offset See OFFSET PRINTING
lithography
litmus
translation of Latin liturgies into the vernaculars of individual countries
and the reform of all sacramental rites. The Lutheran Church revised the
Lutheran Book of Worship in 1978, and the Episcopal Church adopted a
revised Book of COMMON PRAYER in 1979.
Litvinov
above the street in Safety Last (1923) and standing in for a football
tackling-dummy in The Freshman (1925). He was the highest paid star
of the 1920s. He received a special Academy Award in 1952.
Lloyd George of Dwyfor, David Lloyd George, Earl (b. Jan.
17, 1863, Manchester, Eng.—d. March 26, 1945, Ty-newydd, near
Llanystumdwy, Caernarvonshire, Wales) British prime minister (1916–
22). He entered Parliament in 1890 as a Liberal and retained his seat for
55 years. He served as president of the Board of Trade (1905–08), then
as chancellor of the Exchequer (1908–15). Rejection of his controversial
“People’s Budget” (to raise taxes for social programs) in 1909 by the
House of Lords led to a constitutional crisis and passage of the PARLIAMENT
ACT OF 1911. He devised the National Insurance Act of 1911, which laid
the foundation of the British WELFARE STATE. As minister of munitions (1915–
16), he used unorthodox methods to ensure that war supplies were forth-
coming during World War I. He replaced H.H. ASQUITH as prime minister
in 1916, with Conservative support in his coalition government. His small
war cabinet ensured speedy decisions. Distrustful of the competence of
the British high command, he was constantly at odds with Gen. DOUGLAS
HAIG. In the 1918 elections his decision to continue a coalition govern-
ment further split the LIBERAL PARTY. He was one of the three great states-
men responsible for the Treaty of VERSAILLES at the PARIS PEACE CONFERENCE.
He began the negotiations that culminated in the Anglo-Irish treaty of
1921. He resigned in 1922 and headed an ailing Liberal Party (1926–31).
Lloyd Webber, Andrew later Baron Lloyd Webber (b. March
ity was limited. See also INSURANCE, LIABILITY INSURANCE.
Llull
British South Africa Co. under CECIL RHODES undertook a military expedi-
tion that destroyed the Ndebele kingdom in 1893. See also KHAMA III.
lobotomy
British EMPIRICISM.
Locofoco
approval before the U.S. would accept certain League decisions. Pres.
WOODROW WILSON refused to accept the amendments, and the Senate
rejected the treaty.
Lodge, Henry Cabot (b. July 5, 1902, Nahant, Mass., U.S.—d. Feb.
27, 1985, Beverly, Mass.) U.S. politician and diplomat. The grandson of
Sen. HENR Y C. LODGE, he served in the U.S. Senate (1937–44, 1947–52)
and as U.S. representative to the UN (1953–60). In 1960 he was the
Republican vice presidential candidate under RICHARD NIXON. During the
1960s he served as U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam and as ambassa-
dor to West Germany. In 1969 he was the chief U.S. negotiator at the
Paris peace talks with North Vietnam. He later served as special envoy
to the Vatican.
loggia
SUBSTANTIATION, and INDULGENCES.
Lomax
BUCKINGHAM PALACE, the TATE GALLERIES, the National Gallery, the BRITISH
MUSEUM, and the VICTORIA AND ALBERT MUSEUM.
London City (pop., 2001: metro area, 432,451), southeastern Ontario.
It lies on the Thames River, near several of the GREAT LAKES. Its name and
site were chosen in 1792 for the location of a capital of Upper Canada,
but the plans failed to materialize. First settled in 1826, it was incorpo-
rated as a city in 1855. It became an important transportation and indus-
trial centre as a result of its interlake location. It is the seat of the
University of Western Ontario.
London, Great Fire of See GREAT FIRE OF LONDON
London, Great Plague of See GREAT PLAGUE OF LONDON
London, Jack orig. John Griffith Chaney (b. Jan. 12, 1876, San
Jack London writing The Sea Wolf,
1904.
JACK LONDON STATE HISTORIC PARK
Lon Nol (cid:2) Long
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
brother). At their new base the Communists were able to build up their
strength at a safe remove from the Nationalists in preparation for their
eventual victory in 1949.
Long Parliament Session of the English Parliament summoned in
November 1640 by CHARLES I, so named to distinguish it from the Short
Parliament of April–May 1640. Charles called the session to raise the
money needed for his war against the Scots. Resistant to Charles’s
demands, the Parliament caused the king’s advisers to resign and passed
an act forbidding its own dissolution without its members’ consent. Ten-
sion between the king and Parliament increased until the ENGLISH CIVIL WAR
broke out in 1642. After the king’s defeat (1646), the army, led by THO-
MAS PRIDE, exercised political power and in 1648 expelled all but 60 mem-
bers of the Long Parliament. The remaining group, called the Rump,
brought Charles to trial and execution (1649); it was forcibly ejected in
1653. In 1659, after the end of OLIVER CROMWELL’s protectorate, the Parlia-
ment was reestablished; those who were excluded in 1648 were restored
to membership. The Parliament dissolved itself in 1660.
longbow Leading missile weapon of the English from the 14th century
into the 16th century. Probably of Welsh origin, it was usually 6 ft (2 m)
tall and shot arrows more than a yard long. The best were made of YEW,
might require a force of 100 lbs (45 kg) to draw, and had an effective
range of 200 yards (180 m). English archers used longbows in the HUN-
DRED YEARS’ WAR, and the weapon played an important role in the battles
of CRÉCY, Poitiers, and AGINCOURT. See also BOW AND ARROW, CROSSBOW.
Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth (b. Feb. 27, 1807, Portland,
Longhi
AMERICAN REVOLUTION.
longitude See LATITUDE AND LONGITUDE
Longmen caves or Lung-men caves Series of Chinese cave
temples carved into the rock of a high riverbank south of Luoyang, in
HENAN province. Construction began late in the NORTHERN WEI DYNASTY (AD
386–535) and continued sporadically through the 6th century and the TANG
DYNASTY. Delicately crafted to create ethereal effects in stone, the temples
contain images of the BUDDHA clothed as a Chinese scholar. Work at Long-
men culminated in 672–675 with the construction of a monumental shrine
known as Fengxian Si, which includes a seated Buddha more than 35 ft
(10.7 m) high.
Longshan culture or Lung-shan culture (2500–1900 BC)
Lönnrot
López Portillo
(1961, Academy Award), Boccaccio
’70 (1962), Yesterday, Today, and
Tomorrow (1964), Marriage Italian
Style (1964), and A Special Day
(1977).
Lorentz
BUNE.)
Los Glaciares
Lou Gehrig disease See AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS
loudspeaker or speaker In SOUND reproduction, device for convert-
ing electrical energy into acoustical (sound) signal energy that is radiated
into a room or open air (see ACOUSTICS). The part of the speaker that con-
verts electrical into mechanical energy is frequently called the motor, or
voice coil. The motor vibrates a diaphragm that vibrates the air in imme-
diate contact with it, producing a sound wave corresponding to the pat-
tern of the original speech, music, or other acoustic signal. See illustration
opposite.
Louganis
1140 I
Louis VII (cid:2) Louis XV style
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
six previous or subsequent heavyweight champions: Primo Carnera, Max
Baer, Jack Sharkey, James J. Braddock, Max Schmeling, and Jersey Joe
Walcott. Nicknamed “the Brown Bomber,” Louis gained the world heavy-
weight championship by defeating Braddock in 1937 and held the title
until 1949. Two of Louis’s most famous bouts, those with the German
boxer Max Schmeling, were invested with nationalist and racial implica-
tions, as Schmeling was seen, unfairly, as the embodiment of Aryanism
and the Nazi party. Louis lost to Schmeling in 1936 but defeated him in
one round in 1938, causing much jubilation among Americans, and espe-
cially African Americans. He successfully defended his title 25 times (21
by knockout) before retiring in 1949. His service in the U.S. Army dur-
ing World War II no doubt prevented him from defending his title many
more times. He made unsuccessful comeback attempts against Ezzard
Charles in 1950 and Rocky Marciano in 1951.
Louis, Morris orig. Morris Louis Bernstein (b. Nov. 24, 1912,
Louis, St. See LOUIS IX
Louis-Napoléon See NAPOLEON III
Louis-Philippe known as the Citizen King (b. Oct. 6, 1773, Paris,
France—d. Aug. 26, 1850, Claremont, Surrey, Eng.) King of the French
(1830–48). Eldest son of the duke d’ORLÉANS, he supported the new gov-
ernment at the outbreak of the French Revolution and joined the Revo-
lutionary army in 1792 but deserted during the war with Austria (1793)
and lived in exile in Switzerland, the U.S., and England. He returned to
France on the restoration of LOUIS XVIII and joined the liberal opposition.
Following the JULY REVOLUTION (1830) and CHARLES X’s abdication, he was
proclaimed the “Citizen King” by ADOLPHE THIERS and elected by the leg-
islature. During the subsequent July Monarchy, he consolidated his power
by steering a middle course between the right-wing monarchists and the
socialists and other republicans but resorted to repressive measures
because of numerous rebellions and attempts on his life. He strengthened
France’s position in Europe and cooperated with the British in forcing the
Dutch to recognize Belgian independence. Mounting middle-class oppo-
sition to his arbritrary rule and his inability to win allegiance from the
new industrial classes caused his abdication during the FEBRUAR Y REVOLU-
TION of 1848.
Louis the Bavarian See LOUIS IV
Louis the Fat See LOUIS VI
Louis the Pious See LOUIS I
Louis the Younger See LOUIS VII
Louisiade
viding decorative motifs. Notable artists and designers include JEAN-
HONORÉ FRAGONARD, FRANÇOIS BOUCHER, and JEAN-BAPTISTE OUDR Y.
including ANNE-ROBERT-JACQUES TURGOT and
CLASSICISM.
Louis XVII orig. Louis-Charles (b. March 27, 1785, Versailles,
France—d. June 8, 1795, Paris) Titular king of France from 1793. The
second son of LOUIS XVI and MARIE-ANTOINETTE, he became heir to the throne
on his brother’s death, shortly after the outbreak of the FRENCH REVOLUTION.
In 1792 he was imprisoned with the rest of the royal family. When his
father was beheaded in 1793, the French ÉMIGRÉ NOBILITY proclaimed Louis-
Charles king. He died in prison at age 10, but the secrecy surrounding his
last months gave rise to rumours that he was not dead, and over the next
few decades more than 30 persons claimed to be Louis XVII. DNA tests
in 2000 established that the child who died in 1795 was in fact the son
of Louis XIV and Marie-Antoinette.
Louis XVIII orig. Louis-Stanislas-Xavier, count de Provence
Louis, Joe in full Joseph Louis Barrow (b. May 13, 1914, Lafay-
ette, Ala., U.S.—d. April 12, 1981, Las Vegas, Nev.) U.S. boxer. Louis
was born into a sharecropper’s family and only began boxing after the
family moved to Detroit. He won the U.S. Amateur Athletic Union title
in 1934 and turned professional that year. During his career he defeated
Louisville
Lovejoy, Elijah P(arish)
1802, Albion, Maine,
U.S.—d. Nov. 7, 1837, Alton, Ill.)
U.S. newspaper editor and abolition-
ist. He moved to St. Louis in 1827. In 1833 he became editor of the St.
Louis Observer, a Presbyterian weekly in which he wrote articles strongly
condemning slavery. Under the threat of mob violence (1836), he moved
his paper from the slave state of Missouri across the river to Alton, in the
free state of Illinois. There mobs repeatedly destroyed his presses, and he
was shot and killed while defending his building against an attack. News
of his death strengthened abolitionist sentiment.
Lovelace, Ada King, countess of orig. Augusta Ada Byron,
Lovell
Lowry
Lubbock
Lucerne
Ludwig I See LOUIS I
Ludwig II See LOUIS II
Ludwig IV See LOUIS IV
Ludwig, Carl F(riedrich) W(ilhelm) (b. Dec. 29, 1816, Witzen-
Lueger
Luhya or Luyia
Lunacharsky, Anatoly (Vasilyevich) (b. Nov. 23, 1875, Poltava,
Ukraine, Russian Empire—d. Dec. 26, 1933, Menton, France) Russian
politician and writer. Deported in 1898 for his revolutionary activities, he
joined the BOLSHEVIKs in 1904 and disseminated propaganda to Russian
students and political refugees in foreign countries. He joined VLADIMIR ILICH
LENIN in Russia in 1917 and was appointed commissar for education, a
role in which he did much to ensure the preservation of works of art dur-
ing the RUSSIAN CIVIL WAR. He encouraged innovation in the theatre and in
education, and he published plays of his own.
Lunceford
Lupino
Luther, Martin (b. Nov. 10, 1483, Eisleben, Saxony—d. Feb. 18, 1546,
Eisleben) German priest who sparked the REFORMATION. The son of a miner,
he studied philosophy and law before entering an Augustinian monastery
in 1505. He was ordained two years later and continued his theological
studies at the University of Wittenberg, where he became a professor of
biblical studies. He was shocked by the corruption of the clergy on a trip
to Rome in 1510 and was later troubled by doubts centring on fear of
divine retributive justice. His spiritual crisis was resolved when he hit on
the idea of JUSTIFICATION by faith, the doctrine that salvation is granted as a
gift through God’s grace. He urged reform of the Roman Catholic church,
protesting the sale of INDULGENCES and other abuses, and in 1517 he dis-
tributed to the archbishop of Mainz and several friends his NINETY-FIVE
THESES (according to legend, Luther nailed the theses to the door of the
castle church in Wittenberg); the theses questioned Roman Catholic teach-
ing and called for reform. In 1521 he was excommunicated by POPE LEO
IX and declared an outlaw at the Diet of Worms (see WORMS, DIET OF).
Under the protection of the elector of Saxony, Luther took refuge in Wart-
burg. There he translated the Bible into German; his superbly vigorous
translation has long been regarded as the greatest landmark in the history
of the GERMAN LANGUAGE. He later returned to Wittenberg, and in 1525 he
married the former nun Katherina von Bora, with whom he raised six
children. Though his preaching was the principal spark that set off the
PEASANTS’ WAR (1524–25), his vehement denunciation of the peasants con-
tributed to their defeat. His break with Rome led to the founding of the
Lutheran Church (see LUTHERANISM); the Lutheran confession of faith or,
AUGSBURG CONFESSION, was produced with Luther’s sanction by PHILIPP
MELANCHTHON in 1530. Luther’s writings included hymns, a liturgy, and
many theological works.
Lutheranism Protestant movement founded on the principles of MAR-
TIN LUTHER. Lutheranism arose at the start of the REFORMATION, after Luther
posted his NINETY-FIVE THESES in Wittenberg. It spread through much of Ger-
many and into Scandinavia, where it was established by law. It was
brought to the New World by the colonists of New Netherland and NEW
SWEDEN and spread through the U.S. Middle Atlantic states in the 18th
century and the Midwest in the 19th century. Its doctrines are contained
in the catechisms of Luther and in the AUGSBURG CONFESSION. Lutheran
doctrine emphasizes SALVATION by faith alone and the primacy of the BIBLE
as the church’s authority. The Lutheran ministry is one of service—not
special status—and is described as the priesthood of all believers. Luth-
erans accept two sacraments (baptism and the Eucharist) and believe in
predestination to salvation. The Lutheran World Federation is based in
Geneva. See also PIETISM.
lutite
Luxemburg
the Ionian Greeks in the 7th–6th centuries BC through such economic
developments as the use of metallic coinage. It was conquered by the Per-
sians under CYRUS II in 546 BC. It later passed to Syria and Pergamum, and
under the Romans it became part of the province of Asia.
lye Alkaline (see ALKALI) liquid extracted by soaking wood ashes in water,
commonly used for washing and in making SOAP. More generally, lye is
any strong alkaline solution or solid, such as sodium hydroxide (CAUSTIC
SODA) or potassium hydroxide (caustic potash).
Lyell
a Roman citizen; all his speeches were delivered by others. He and his
brother were seized by the ruling oligarchy in 404 as disaffected aliens;
his brother was killed but Lysias
escaped. He ranks with ANTIPHON as
a writer of clear, simple prose of
great effectiveness, and his style
became one model for Attic Greek
prose. Many of his writings survive.
lysine
M31 See ANDROMEDA GALAXY
Ma-fa-mu-ts’o See MAPAM YUMCO
maa-alused
MacAlpin, Kenneth See KENNETH I
macaque
Macdonald, Sir John (Alexander) (b. Jan. 11, 1815, Glasgow,
PROGRESSIVE CONSERVATIVE PARTY OF CANADA) in 1854 and became premier of
Macdonough
Macfadden, Bernarr orig. Bernard Adolphus McFadden (b.
LATHES; SHAPERS and PLANERS; power DRILLS or DRILL PRESSES; MILLING machines;
GRINDING MACHINES; power SAWS; and presses (e.g., PUNCH PRESSES).
machismo
Mackinac
while studying at Oxford. In the 1930s he became known as one of a
group of socially committed young poets that included W.H. AUDEN, C.
DAY-LEWIS, and STEPHEN SPENDER. His volumes include Autumn Journal
(1939) and The Burning Perch (1963). He wrote and produced radio verse
plays for the BBC, notably The Dark Tower (1947), with music by BEN-
JAMIN BRITTEN. Among his prose works are Letters from Iceland (1937; with
Auden) and The Poetry of W.B. Yeats (1941).
Macon
Madani
was made into the new state of Chhattisgarh. Though Madhya Pradesh is
rich in mineral resources, its economic mainstay is agriculture.
Madhyamika
Maeander River See MENDERES RIVER
Maecenas
Magdalen
SHAMAN, VODUN, WITCHCRAFT AND SORCER Y.
MARQUEZ, JORGE AMADO, JORGE LUIS BORGES, MIGUEL ANGEL ASTURIAS, JULIO
CORTAZAR, and Isabel Allende (born 1942). The term has been applied to
literature and art outside of Latin America as well.
magic show See CONJURING
Maginot
and many compounds had been tested for MAGNETISM, and all were found to
have some magnetic property. However, only three elements—iron, NICKEL,
and COBALT—exhibit FERROMAGNETISM. See also COMPASS, ELECTROMAGNET.
PARAMAGNETISM)
NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RESONANCE and ELECTRON SPIN RESONANCE. In medicine, MAG-
NETIC RESONANCE IMAGING is used to produce images of human tissue.
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) Computer production of
are DIAMAGNETISM, PARAMAGNETISM, FERROMAGNETISM, and FERRIMAGNETISM. Mag-
ACCELERATORS.
magnetite or lodestone or magnetic iron ore Iron OXIDE MINERAL
magneto
PHOTOMETR Y.
Magnus Pius, Sextus Pompeius See Sextus POMPEIUS MAGNUS PIUS
magpie Any of several genera of long-tailed songbirds of the CROW
family (Corvidae). The black-billed magpie (Pica pica) is 18 in. (45 cm)
long and strikingly pied (black-and-white), with an iridescent blue-green
tail. It is found in North Africa, across Eurasia, and in western North
America. A bird of farmlands and tree-studded open country, it eats
insects, seeds, small vertebrates, the eggs and young of other birds, and
fresh carrion. It makes a large, round nest of twigs cemented with mud,
and is known for hoarding small, bright objects. Other species (in the
genera Cyanopica, Cissa, and Urocissa) include the brilliant blue or green
magpies of Asia.
Magritte
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi orig. Mahad Prasad Varma (b.
1911?, India) Indian religious leader, founder of TRANSCENDENTAL MEDITA-
TION (TM). He took a degree in physics before going to the Himalayas to
study the ADVAITA school of VEDANTA religious thought with the yogi Guru
Dev for 13 years. He arrived in the U.S. in 1959, preaching the virtues
of TM; in the 1960s the BEATLES were perhaps his most celebrated follow-
ers. The Maharishi (the title means “Great Sage”) returned to India in the
late 1970s and moved to The Netherlands in 1990. His organization,
which includes real estate holdings, schools, and clinics, was worth more
than $3 billion in the late 1990s.
Mahasanghika
and the New York Philharmonic in 1909–10. Ill with heart disease and
mourning his daughter’s death, he wrote the masterly orchestral song
cycle Das Lied von der Erde (1908–09) and his ninth symphony. His
orchestral songs Des Knaben Wunderhorn (1892–98) and Kindertoten-
lieder (1904; Songs on the Deaths of Children) are frequently performed.
His emotionally charged and subtly orchestrated music drew together
many different strands of Romanticism. Although his music was largely
ignored for 50 years after his death, he was later regarded as an impor-
tant forerunner of 20th-century techniques of composition.
Maem)d
Maine, Sir Henry (James Sumner) (b. Aug. 15, 1822, Kelso,
cations by CLIENT-SERVER ARCHITECTURE.
Maintenon
himself was perceived as a colourless and indecisive leader. In 1997 the
Conservatives lost by a landslide to the LABOUR PARTY, and Major was suc-
ceeded as prime minister by TONY BLAIR.
Majorca
Malabo
Malawi, Lake or Lake Nyasa
Malcolm X orig. Malcolm Little later El-Hajj Malik
El-Shabazz (b. May 19, 1925,
Omaha, Neb., U.S.—d. Feb. 21,
1965, New York, N.Y.) U.S. black
Muslim leader. He was raised in
Michigan, where the family house
was burned by the Ku Klux Klan; his
father was later murdered and his
mother was
institutionalized. He
moved to Boston, drifted into petty
crime, and was sent to prison for bur-
glary in 1946. He converted to the
Black Muslim faith (NATION OF ISLAM)
the same year. On his release in
1952, he changed his last name to X
to signify his rejection of his “slave
name.” Soon after meeting the
Nation of
Islam’s
leader, ELIJAH
MUHAMMAD, he became the sect’s
most effective speaker and organizer.
He spoke with bitter eloquence
against white exploitation of blacks and derided the civil rights move-
ment and integration, calling instead for black separatism, black pride,
and the use of violence for self-protection. Differences with Elijah
Muhammad prompted Malcolm to leave the Nation of Islam in 1964. A
pilgrimage to Mecca led him to acknowledge the possibility of world
brotherhood and to convert to orthodox Islam. Rival Black Muslims made
threats against his life, and he was shot to death at a rally in a Harlem
ballroom. His celebrated autobiography (1965) was written by ALEX HALEY
on the basis of numerous interviews conducted shortly before Malcolm’s
death.
Maldives
KUALA
LUMPUR/
Maldon
Malinke
Malpighi
front teeth. They inhabit sub-Saharan Africa, where they hunt small ani-
mals. The aggressive black mamba (D. polylepis), up to 14 ft (4.2 m) long,
may be dull gray, greenish brown, or black, depending on age. It dens in
rocky open country. It rears up to strike, biting a person’s head or trunk.
Its bite is nearly always fatal without antivenin treatment. The green
mamba (e.g., D. angusticeps) is smaller (to 9 ft, or 2.7 m), more strongly
arboreal, and less aggressive.
Mamet
GARBO, Becky Sharp (1935), The Gay Desperado (1936), Blood and Sand
(1941), and Silk Stockings (1957). He was noted for the skillful blending
of music and sound effects with an imaginative visual rhythm.
Ma#m)n
the sea, it again became a major inland port and commercial centre, reviv-
ing economically in the mid-20th century. It has botanical gardens and an
opera house, and the National Research Institute of Amazonia (INPA) and
the Federal University of Amazonas are located there.
Manawatu
heavenly spheres to reunion with the supreme deity. Unlike many Gnos-
tic systems, Mandaeanism supports marriage and forbids sexual license.
It is also characterized by elaborate cultic rituals, particularly for baptism.
Mandaeans view JESUS as a false messiah but revere JOHN THE BAPTIST, whose
life is chronicled in their sacred writings. See also DUALISM, GNOSTICISM.
mandala
writing of his travels in the years
1322 to 1356. Because most of the
material was available in contempo-
encyclopaedias
travel
books, it is not clear whether the
author ever traveled at all, but his lit-
erary skill and imagination have kept
the book popular and highly read-
able. The actual author of the tales
remains unknown. It is not certain
the English knight Sir John
Mandeville ever existed.
Mandingo See MALINKE
Mandinka See MALINKE
mandolin
STATE BUILDING, the site of the former WORLD TRADE CENTER, the UNITED NATIONS
headquarters, WALL STREET, the METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART, the MUSEUM OF
MODERN ART, LINCOLN CENTER for the Performing Arts, CARNEGIE HALL, COLUM-
it was ruled as a union territory until it became a state in 1972. Agricul-
ture and forestry are economic mainstays.
Manitoba
IL BRONZINO.
Mannheim
Mantle, Mickey in full Mickey Charles Mantle (b. Oct. 20, 1931,
BUDDHISM.
enced by WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
Manzù
of ornamental, shade, and timber trees. Maples are important ornamen-
tals for lawns, along streets, and in parks. They offer a great variety of
form, size, and foliage; many display striking autumn colour. The red
maple (A. rubrum) is one of the most common trees in its native eastern
North America, where it tolerates compacted wet soils and city pollution.
Box elder (A. negundo) grows quickly to 30–50 ft (9–15 m) and resists
drought, so early prairie settlers planted many for shade and for wood to
make crates, furniture, paper pulp, and charcoal. The watery, sweet sap
of the sugar maple (A. saccharum) is boiled down for syrup and sugar;
the wood of certain sugar maples is used for furniture.
mapmaking See CARTOGRAPHY
Maponos
jungles in unnavigable rapids and falls; emerging from the most spectacu-
lar of these rapids, the Pongo de Manseriche, it is only 575 ft (175 m)
above sea level. For the rest of its 879-mi (1,415-km) course, it meanders
eastward, receiving the HUALLAGA RIVER and then joining the UCAYALI RIVER
to form the Amazon.
Marat
Marcellus
Marcus Aurelius
extended the Habsburg dominion in
the northeastern Netherlands and
negotiated the Treaty of CAMBRAI
(1529), called the “Ladies’ Peace,”
with Louise of Savoy (1494–1547),
regent for FRANCIS I.
Margaret of Parma (b. 1522,
Margaret of Valois
mariachi
imperial theatre in St. Petersburg. The theatre opened in 1860 and was
named for Maria Aleksandrovna, wife of the reigning tsar. Ballet was not
performed there until 1880 and was presented regularly only after 1889,
when the Imperial Russian Ballet became its resident company and
acquired the Mariinsky name. The theatre’s name was changed to the State
Academic Theatre (1917–35) and later to the Kirov (for SERGEY KIROV)
State Academic Theatre for Opera and Ballet (1935–91); it reverted to its
original name in 1991. Its resident ballet company, the celebrated Mari-
insky (or Kirov) Ballet, tours worldwide.
marijuana
a tribe of the Zan)tah group, which was allied to the Umayyads in Cór-
doba. In 1248 a Marlnid leader, AbH Yaey), captured Fès and made it the
Marlnid capital. The capture of Marrakech (1269) made the Marlnids the
masters of Morocco. They waged inconclusive war in Spain and Africa
that gradually depleted their resources, reducing the realm to anarchy in
the 15th century. Sa!dl sharifs captured Fès in 1554.
Marino, Dan(iel Constantine), Jr. (b. Sept. 15, 1961, Pittsburgh,
Mariology
Markham
1714. Considered one of England’s greatest generals, he secured a repu-
tation in Europe that was unrivaled until the rise of Napoleon.
Marlborough, Sarah Jennings, duchess of (b. May 29, 1660,
Marley, Bob orig. Robert Nesta Marley (b. Feb. 6, 1945, Nine
Marmara
Ua Pu, Ua Huka, Eiao, and Hatutu. The Spanish explorer Àlvaro de
Mendaña de Neira named the islands for the marquesa de Mendoza in
1595. Annexed by France in 1842, the Marquesas form an administrative
division of French Polynesia with headquarters at Taiohae on Nuku Hiva.
marquess
Marsalis
and was a key factor in reviving their economies and stabilizing their
political structures. The plan’s concept was extended to less-developed
countries under the POINT FOUR PROGRAM.
Marshfield Bay See COOS BAY
Marsic War See SOCIAL WAR
marsupial
See also FISHER; POLECAT.
Martí
Martínez Montañés, Juan See Juan Martínez MONTAÑÉS
Martinique
Maryinsky Theatre See MARIINSKY THEATRE
Masaccio
DIALECTICAL MATERIALISM; SOCIALISM; STALINISM; TROTSKYISM.
Mary, Queen of Scots orig. Mary Stuart (b. Dec. 8, 1542, Lin-
lithgow Palace, West Lothian, Scot.—d. Feb. 8, 1587, Fotheringhay
Castle, Northamptonshire, Eng.) Queen of Scotland (1542–67). She
became queen when her father, James V (1512–42), died six days after
her birth. She was sent by her mother, Mary of Guise, to be raised at the
court of the French king HENR Y II and was married in 1558 to his son FRAN-
CIS II. After Francis’s brief rule as king (1559–60) ended with his prema-
ture death, Mary returned to Scotland (1561), where she was distrusted
Masada
masochism
cution in England, and they transferred control of the company to the
emigrants in Massachusetts. Led by JOHN WINTHROP, the colonists founded
their colony on the CHARLES RIVER at what would become BOSTON. In 1684
England annulled the company’s charter and in 1691 established royal
government under a new charter, which merged PLYMOUTH colony and
Maine into the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) U.S. private uni-
massage
mass spectrometry or mass spectroscopy Analytic technique
Massif Central
MAMMOTH.
mastoiditis
PSYCHOLOGY. See also IDENTITY THEOR Y; MIND-BODY PROBLEM.
OF MATERIALS, TESTING MACHINE.
Mather
mathematical physics Branch of mathematical ANALYSIS that empha-
sizes tools and techniques of particular use to physicists and engineers. It
focuses on VECTOR SPACES, MATRIX algebra, DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS (especially
for boundary value problems), INTEGRAL EQUATIONS, INTEGRAL TRANSFORMS, INFI-
NITE SERIES, and COMPLEX VARIABLES. Its approach can be tailored to applica-
tions in electromagnetism, classical MECHANICS, and QUANTUM MECHANICS.
mathematical programming Application of mathematical and
computer programming techniques to the construction of deterministic
models, principally for business and economics. For models that only
require linear algebraic equations, the techniques are called LINEAR PRO-
GRAMMING; for models that require more complex equations, it is called
nonlinear programming. In either case, models frequently involve hun-
dreds or thousands of equations. The discipline emerged during World
War II to solve large-scale military LOGISTICS problems. Mathematical pro-
gramming is also used in planning civilian production and transportation
schedules and in calculating economic growth.
mathematics Science of structure, order, and relation that has evolved
from counting, measuring, and describing the shapes of objects. It deals
with logical reasoning and quantitative calculation. Since the 17th cen-
tury it has been an indispensable adjunct to the physical sciences and
technology, to the extent that it is considered the underlying language of
science. Among the principal branches of mathematics are ALGEBRA, ANALY-
SIS, ARITHMETIC, COMBINATORICS, EUCLIDEAN and NON-EUCLIDEAN geometries, GAME
THEOR Y, NUMBER THEOR Y, NUMERICAL ANALYSIS, OPTIMIZATION, PROBABILITY, SET THEOR Y,
STATISTICS, TOPOLOGY, and TRIGONOMETR Y.
Mathias
Matteotti
Maugham
Mauritius
MawÆil, Al- See MOSUL
Maximian
Maxwell, (Ian) Robert orig. Jan Ludvik Hoch (b. June 10, 1923,
CHEEVER, J.D. SALINGER, EUDORA WELTY, and MAVIS GALLANT. He himself was
the NATIONALIST PARTY and gave birth to the CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY. See
also Treaty of VERSAILLES.
Diego, Calif, U.S.) German-born U.S. physicist. She immigrated to the
U.S. in 1930, where she taught at various universities. She worked on the
separation of URANIUM ISOTOPEs for the MANHATTAN PROJECT. Her work in
theoretical physics led to the explanation of properties of atomic nuclei
based on a structure of “shells” occupied by protons and neutrons. For
her work she was awarded a 1963 Nobel Prize, which she shared with
Hans Jensen (1907–73) and EUGENE WIGNER.
July 19, 1865, Rochester—d. May 26, 1939, Chicago, Ill.), a gifted sur-
geon in all areas, originated modern procedures in goitre surgery, neuro-
surgery, and orthopedic surgery. About 1900 the partnership was changed
to a voluntary association of physicians and specialists, later known as
the Mayo Clinic. In 1915 the brothers established the Mayo Foundation
for Medical Education and Research, which offers graduate training in
medicine and related subjects.
Mayerling affair See RUDOLF
Mayon
mayflower See TRAILING ARBUTUS
Maysles
Mboya
McClung, Nellie orig. Nellie Mooney (b. Oct. 20, 1873, Chats-
McCormick, Robert R(uther-
ford) known as Colonel McCor-
McCrea
economics at the University of California, Berkeley (1963–79 and from
1990), Yale University (1977–78), and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (1978–91). In 1974 McFadden developed conditional logit
analysis—a method for determining how people make choices that maxi-
mize the utility of their decisions. His work has helped predict usage rates
for MASS TRANSIT, and his statistical methods have been applied to labour-
force participation, health care, housing, and the environment.
McGill University Privately endowed but state-supported university
in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. It was founded in 1821 through a gift left
by the Scottish-born Canadian merchant James McGill (1744–1813). It is
internationally known for its work in chemistry, medicine, and biology.
In addition, it has faculties of agricultural and environmental sciences,
arts, dentistry, education, engineering, law, management, music, religious
studies, and science. The language of instruction is English, though stu-
dents may write examinations in French.
McGillivray
crat WILLIAM JENNINGS BR YAN. In 1897
he signed the Dingley Tariff,
highest protective tariff in American
history to that time. In 1898 the USS
MAINE exploded and sank in the har-
bour of Havana, Cuba, then a colony
of Spain; believing the Spanish
responsible, McKinley demanded
independence for the island, which
Spain refused. The U.S. easily won
the brief SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR.
McLuhan
mean, median, and mode In mathematics, the three principal ways
of designating the average value of a list of numbers. The arithmetic mean
is found by adding the numbers and dividing the sum by the number of
numbers in the list. This is what is most often meant by an average. The
median is the middle value in a list ordered from smallest to largest. The
mode is the most frequently occurring value on the list. There are other
types of means. A geometric mean is found by multiplying all values in
a list and then taking the root of that product equal to the number of val-
ues (e.g., the square root if there are two numbers). The geometric mean
is typically used in cases of exponential growth or decline (see EXPONEN-
TIAL FUNCTION). In STATISTICS, the mean of a RANDOM VARIABLE is its expected
value—i. e., the theoretical long-run arithmetic mean of the outcomes of
repeated trials, such as a large number of tosses of a die.
mean-value theorems In mathematics, two theorems, one associ-
INTEGRAL. See also ROLLE’S THEOREM.
meander
Mead, George Herbert (b. Feb. 27, 1863, South Hadley, Mass.,
U.S.—d. April 26, 1931, Chicago, Ill.) U.S. philosopher, sociologist, and
social psychologist prominent in the development of PRAGMATISM. He stud-
ied at Oberlin College, graduated from Harvard University (B.A., 1888),
and went on to study philosophy and psychology at the Universities of
Leipzig and Berlin (1888–91). Mead then taught philosophy and psychol-
ogy at the University of Michigan (1891–94) with JOHN DEWEY and CHARLES
HORTON COOLEY. In 1894 he joined Dewey in moving to the University of
Chicago and taught there the rest of his life. Mead’s focus was the rela-
tionship between the self and society, particularly the emergence of the
human self in the process of social interaction. His works include The
Philosophy of the Present (1932) and Mind, Self, and Society (1934). See
also INTERACTIONISM.
measles or rubeola
Med fly See MEDITERRANEAN FRUIT FLY
made by BENVENUTO CELLINI.
Medan
Médicis, Catherine de See CATHERINE DE MÉDICIS
Médicis, Marie de See MARIE DE MÉDICIS
Medill
near Mantua. He was known as Giovanni dalle Bande Nere (“of the Black
Bands”) for the black banners his army (or bands) carried in mourning
for Leo X after 1521.
Medici, Giuliano de’ (b. 1479—d. March 17, 1516, Florence) Ruler
of Florence (1512–13). A member of the elder branch of the MEDICI FAM-
ILY, he was the son of Lorenzo de’ MEDICI. In 1494 his brother, Piero de’
Medici, was ousted as ruler of Florence by the republicans, aided by the
French. In 1512 Pope JULIUS II demanded that Florence enter his Holy
League against France and allow the exiled Medici to return to Florence.
Giuliano returned as ruler (Piero having died in 1503) and used harsh
measures to suppress a conspiracy. In 1513, after another brother became
Pope LEO X, he went to Rome as a cardinal. In 1515 he received the French
title of duke de Nemours.
Medici, Lorenzo de’ known as Lorenzo the Magnificent (b. Jan.
1, 1449, Florence—d. April 9, 1492,
Careggi, near Florence) Florentine
statesman and patron of arts and let-
ters. The
grandson
DE’MEDICI, he was the most brilliant of
of COSIMO
the MEDICI FAMILY. He ruled FLORENCE
with his younger brother, Giuliano,
from 1469. Giuliano was assassi-
nated in 1478 by the Pazzi, a leading
Florentine banking family, which
was in league with Pope SIXTUS IV
(who did not support the assassina-
tion) and the king of Naples. Loren-
zo’s direct appeal to the king allowed
him to regain power in Florence, and
he was sole ruler of the city until his
death. His 13-year-old son Giovanni
was created a cardinal by Pope Inno-
cent VIII and later became pope as
LEO X. Lorenzo used the Medici
riches to patronize many artists,
including SANDRO BOTTICELLI, LEONARDO
DA VINCI, and MICHELANGELO, and he
systems, it includes research, PUBLIC HEALTH, EPIDEMIOLOGY, and PHARMACOLOGY.
Each country sets its own requirements for medical degrees (M.D.’s) and
TAR connects the Mediterranean with the Atlantic Ocean. In the northeast
the Sea of MARMARA, the DARDANELLES, and the BOSPORUS link it with the
BLACK SEA. The SUEZ CANAL connects the Mediterranean with the RED SEA
in the southeast. A submarine ridge between SICILY and Africa divides the
sea into eastern and western parts, which are subdivided into the Adriatic,
Aegean, Tyrrhenian, Ionian, and Ligurian seas. Its largest islands are
MAJORCA, CORSICA, SARDINIA, SICILY, CRETE, CYPRUS, and RHODES. The RHÔNE,
medusa
a system of spiritual beliefs according to which the goal of life was to
realize the oneness of God, from whom the whole universe emanates.
Convinced that his calling was to awaken the world to that realization
through love, he worked zealously with the poor and the physically and
mentally ill. Though he attracted a sizable following in India and abroad,
he did not try to establish a religion. For the last 44 years of his life he
maintained silence, communicating by means of gestures and an alpha-
bet board. His tomb at Meherabad is a place of pilgrimage.
Mehmed
to treat African languages in terms of PHONETICS and MORPHOLOGY. His books
include Outline of the Phonetics of the Bantu Languages (1899) and
Principles of the Comparative Grammar of the Bantu Languages (1906).
Meinong
Melanchthon
Melilla
Memel
Mencius
Menderes
meninges
cessful commission for the Metropolitan Opera. The Medium (1946) had
a Broadway run, and The Consul (1950, Pulitzer Prize) was also success-
ful. The highly popular Amahl and the Night Visitors (1951), for televi-
sion, was followed by The Saint of Bleecker Street (1955, Pulitzer Prize).
In 1958 he founded the Festival of Two Worlds in Spoleto, Italy; it enjoyed
great success, and in 1977 he founded a New World counterpart in
Charleston, S.C.
Menshevik
Mercator
merengue
meristem
Mersey
the AZTEC. See also CHICHÉN ITZÁ; MIXTEC; MONTE ALBÁN; NAHUA; NAHUATL
LANGUAGE; TENOCHTITLÁN; TIKAL.
from the MAYA CODICES. See also MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION.
Mesolithic
Messiaen
century. ALBRECHT DÜRER and LEONARDO
DA VINCI were its greatest exponents.
It went out of fashion in the 17th cen-
tury with the rise of the graphite pen-
cil but was revived in the 18th
century by the miniaturists and in the
20th century by Joseph Stella.
metallography
metastable
and explosive. A clean-burning fuel, it may substitute (at least in part) for
GASOLINE. It is also used for DENATURATION of ETHANOL. A violent poison, it
causes blindness and eventually death when drunk.
methionine
Montejo conquered the remnants of Maya
civilization in 1526, and Mexico became
part of the Viceroyalty of NEW SPAIN. In
1821 rebels negotiated independence from
Spain, and in 1823 a new congress declared Mexico a republic. In 1845
the U.S. voted to annex TEXAS, initiating the MEXICAN WAR. Under the Treaty
of GUADALUPE HIDALGO in 1848, Mexico ceded a vast territory in what is
now the western and southwestern U.S. The Mexican government endured
several rebellions and civil wars in the late 19th and early 20th centuries
(see MEXICAN REVOLUTION). During World War II (1939–45) it declared war
on the AXIS POWERS, and in the postwar era it was a founding member of
the UNITED NATIONS (1945) and the ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (1948).
INSTITUTIONAL REVOLUTIONAR Y PARTY. See table on opposite page.
México
and 1867 the university was controlled by the Roman Catholic church.
After 1867, independent professional schools of law, medicine, engineer-
ing, and architecture were established by the government. The university
was given administrative autonomy in 1929. It offers a broad range of
programs in all major academic and professional subjects.
Mexico City Spanish Ciudad de México
at ensuring tribal welfare. In the 19th century the Miami ceded most of
their lands to the U.S., with one band remaining in Indiana and the rest
removing to a reservation in Oklahoma. In the 2000 U.S. census some
3,800 people claimed sole Miami descent. See also LITTLE TURTLE.
Miami City (pop., 2000: 362,470), southeastern Florida, U.S., situated
on BISCAYNE BAY at the mouth of the Miami River. The southernmost large
city in the continental U.S., it has a beach 7 mi (11 km) long. A Spanish
mission was founded near the site in 1567, but permanent settlement did
not begin until 1835, when U.S. forces built Fort Dallas for the removal
of SEMINOLE Indians to the West. The arrival of the railway in 1896 spurred
development, and Miami was incorporated the same year. The city has
been damaged by occasional hurricanes, notably in 1926 and 1935. Nearly
300,000 Cuban refugees have arrived since 1959 (see CUBA), establishing
“Little Havana” within the city. It is a major resort and retirement centre,
and its port handles the world’s largest number of cruise-ship passengers.
It is also a banking centre. Educational institutions include the University
of Miami and Florida International University.
Miami Beach City (pop., 2000: 87,933), southeastern Florida, U.S. It
is situated on an island across BISCAYNE BAY from MIAMI. Until 1912 the site
was a mangrove swamp. John S. Collins and Carl F. Fisher pioneered real
estate development and built a bridge across the bay; the area was dredged
to form an island measuring 7.4 sq mi (19 sq km), with an 8-mi (13-km)
beach. The city, incorporated in 1915, is now a luxury resort and con-
vention centre. It is connected with Miami by several causeways and is
noted for its ART DECO architecture.
Miao See HMONG
Miao-Yao languages See HMONG-MIEN LANGUAGES
include the vivid and impassioned Histoire de la révolution française, 7
vol. (1847–53). In his later years he wrote a series of lyrical books on
nature, displaying his superb prose style.
Michelin
simple life-forms including PROTOZOANS, ALGAE, MOLDS, BACTERIA, and VIRUSES.
ICS, notably PENICILLIN. See also BACTERIOLOGY, GENETIC ENGINEERING.
microchip See INTEGRATED CIRCUIT
microcircuit See INTEGRATED CIRCUIT
micrococcus
microsurgery or micromanipulation Surgical technique for oper-
ating on minute structures, with specialized, tiny precision instruments
under observation through a microscope, sometimes equipped with cam-
eras to show the operation on a monitor. Microsurgery permits operations
that were once impossible—surgery on the delicate bones of the inner and
middle ear, reattachment of severed limbs or digits, repair of the retina,
and removal of tumours intricately embedded in vital structures.
microtubule
Middlesbrough
Miescher
Mikan
militia
Millais
Millerand
staff of Punch in 1906 and produced
successful
light comedies and a
memorable detective novel, The Red
House Mystery (1922), before verses
written for his
son Christopher
Robin grew into the collections
When We Were Very Young (1924)
and Now We Are Six (1927), which
became beloved classics. Stories
about the adventures of Christopher
Robin and the toy animals Pooh, Pig-
let, Kanga, Roo, Tigger, Rabbit,
Owl, and Eeyore are told in the
immensely popular Winnie-the-Pooh
(1926) and The House at Pooh Cor-
ner (1928).
Milne Bay Inlet of
Milner, Alfred later Viscount Milner (of St. James’s and
Milon
Mimamsa
SCIENCE.
mind-body problem Metaphysical problem of the relationship
between mind and body. The modern problem stems from the thought of
RENÉ DESCARTES, who is responsible for the classical formulation of DUAL-
ISM. Descartes’s INTERACTIONISM had many critics even in his own day. THO-
MAS HOBBES denied the existence of mental substance. MATERIALISM of a sort
was also supported by Descartes’s correspondent Pierre Gassendi (1592–
1655). BENEDICT DE SPINOZA posited a single substance of which the mental
and the material are attributes; his theory is known as psycho-physical
parallelism. More recent views include the DOUBLE-ASPECT THEOR Y, IDENTITY
THEOR Y, eliminative materialism (which denies the reality of the familiar
categories of mental state posited in so-called FOLK PSYCHOLOGY), and theo-
ries of SUPERVENIENCE.
Mindanao
applied only to women) was enacted by Massachusetts in 1912. Mini-
mum wage laws or agreements now exist in most nations.
mining Excavation of materials from the Earth’s crust, including those
of organic origin, such as coal and petroleum. Modern mining is costly
and complicated. First, a mineral vein that can likely produce enough of
the desired substance to justify the cost of extraction must be located.
Then the size of the vein or deposit is determined, and mining engineers
decide the best way to mine it. Most of the world’s yearly mineral pro-
duction is extracted by surface mining, which includes open-pit mining,
strip mining, and quarrying. For ore bodies that lie a considerable dis-
tance below the surface, underground mining must be considered. In both
techniques, excavating and extracting mineral substances involve costly
combinations of drilling, blasting, hoisting, and hauling, as well as mea-
sures for health and safety and reduction of environmental impact.
mink Either of two species of nocturnal, semiaquatic carnivores in the
WEASEL family (Mustelidae) that are
trapped and raised commercially for
their pelts. American mink (Mustela
vison),
found throughout North
America except in arid parts of the
southwestern U.S.,
is 17–29 in.
(43–74 cm) long and weighs up to
3.5 lb (1.6 kg). The Eurasian species
(M. lutreola) is slightly smaller. The
rich brown coat consists of a dense,
soft underfur overlaid with glossy
guard hairs. Except for furs in the
rare mutant colours produced by
crossbreeding, wild mink fur is more valuable than “ranch mink.”
Minkowski
Minggantu Chinese Ming Antu, Mongolian Minganto (b. ?—d.
Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co. See 3M
Mino da Fiesole
SOP, and CATNIP.
minuet
PLAY; MYSTER Y PLAY.
mirage
Mishna or Mishnah
Missouri River, Little See LITTLE MISSOURI RIVER
Misti
INDIAN; WOODLAND CULTURE.
Mistral
ily, she became known for her witty satiric novels of upper-class life,
including the quasi-autobiographical The Pursuit of Love (1945), Love in
a Cold Climate (1949), The Blessing (1951), and Don’t Tell Alfred (1960).
A volume of essays she coedited, Noblesse Oblige (1956), popularized
the distinction between linguistic usages that are “U” (upper-class) and
“non-U.” Her sister Jessica (1917–96) was a noted writer on U.S. society
whose best-known book was The American Way of Death (1963).
Mithra
order, whose powers he complements as guardian of the human order. As
spirit of the day, he is sometimes associated with the sun. His Iranian
counterpart is MITHRA.
Mitre
Moabites
the northern U.S. to Brazil; it has been introduced into Hawaii and thrives
in suburban areas. It sings from perches, even at night, and vigorously
defends its territory. Other Mimus species range from Central America to
Patagonia, and the blue mockingbird (genus Melanotis) inhabits much of
Mexico. Various subspecies of the Galápagos mockingbird (genus Neso-
mimus) inhabit the different islands.
Moctezuma II See MONTEZUMA II
modal
of industrialization, is also applied to institutions, which become more
highly specialized. Instead of being governed by tradition or custom,
society comes to be governed according to abstract principles formulated
for that purpose. Traditional religious beliefs often decline in importance,
and distinctive cultural traits are often lost.
Modersohn-Becker
(30–28 BC) and became a Roman province in AD 15. During the Dacian
Wars (AD 85–89) it was divided into two provinces: Moesia Superior and
Moesia Inferior. Despite barbarian invasions, it remained part of the East-
ern Roman Empire until the 7th century, when it was occupied by Slavs
and Bulgarians.
Mogadishu
not allowed to stand in the 2002 presidential election and was succeeded
by the winner, opposition candidate Mwai Kibaki.
Moiseyev
bet. Moldova was admitted to the UN in 1992. In 2000 it abandoned its
semipresidential form of government to become a parliamentary repub-
mole or mol
RABIA along the Black Sea coast. (See MOL-
DAVIA for history prior to 1940.) The two
regions were incorporated as the Molda-
vian Soviet Socialist Republic in 1940. In
1991 Moldavia declared independence
from the Soviet Union. It adopted the Romanian spelling of Moldova,
having earlier legitimized use of the Roman rather than the Cyrillic alpha-
Moley, Raymond (Charles) (b. Sept. 27, 1886, Berea, Ohio,
U.S.—d. Feb. 18, 1975, Phoenix, Ariz.) U.S. educator and political
adviser. He taught political science at Columbia University from 1923 to
1954. In the 1920s he prepared studies of criminal justice in a number of
cities for New York Gov. FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT. When Roosevelt was pre-
paring for his 1932 presidential campaign, Moley formed the BRAIN TRUST
to advise him on national issues. Moley wrote many of Roosevelt’s cam-
paign speeches and coined the term NEW DEAL. From 1937 to 1968 he was
a contributing editor of Newsweek magazine.
Molière
negotiated the GERMAN-SOVIET NONAGGRESSION PACT in 1939, and in World
War II he ordered the production of the crude bottle bombs later called
“Molotov cocktails.” He arranged the alliances with the U.S. and Britain
and was the Soviet spokesman at the Allied conferences during and after
the war. After being dismissed in 1956 by NIKITA KHRUSHCHEV, Molotov
joined an unsuccessful attempt to depose Khrushchev (1957) and lost all
his party offices; in 1962 he was expelled from the Communist Party.
molting Shedding or casting off of an animal’s outer layer or covering
and formation of its replacement. Regulated by hormones, molting occurs
throughout the animal kingdom. It includes the shedding and replacement
of horns, hair, skin, and feathers and the process by which a nymph or
other organism sheds an external skeleton for the purpose of growth or
change in shape.
Moltke, Helmuth (Johannes Ludwig) von (b. May 25, 1848,
Gersdorff, Mecklenburg—d. June 18, 1916, Berlin, Ger.) German soldier.
A nephew of HELMUTH VON MOLTKE, he rose rapidly in the German army and
served as adjutant to his uncle from 1882. He was appointed quartermas-
ter general in 1903 and chief of the German general staff in 1906. At the
outbreak of World War I, he applied the SCHLIEFFEN PLAN, devised by his
predecessor, but his inability to revise the plan to cope with tactical and
command errors contributed to the halt of the German offensive in the
Battle of the MARNE (1914). He was relieved of his command shortly after
and died a broken man two years later.
Moltke
At the speeds treated in classical MECHANICS, the effect of speed on the mass
can be neglected, and changes in momentum are the result of changes in
velocity alone. If a constant force acts on a particle for a given time, the
product of the force and the time interval, the impulse, is equal to the
change in momentum. For any array of several objects, the total momen-
tum is the sum of the individual momenta. See also ANGULAR MOMENTUM.
Mommsen
Monck
AND LOAN ASSOCIATIONS, and CREDIT UNIONS should be counted as part of the
money supply. CENTRAL BANKS regulate the money supply to stabilize their
national economies. See also MONETAR Y POLICY.
Möngke
MONEY.
CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT. In addition, the FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM provides con-
People’s Republic was established in 1924.
The country adopted a new constitution in
1992 and shortened its name to Mongolia.
Mongolian languages Family of
Mongoloid See RACE
monism
Monmouth
monopsony
served two terms as president, presiding in a period that became known
as the ERA OF GOOD FEELINGS. He oversaw the SEMINOLE WAR of 1817–18
and the acquisition of the Floridas (1819–21), and he signed the MISSOURI
COMPROMISE (1820). With Secretary of State JOHN QUINCY ADAMS, he devel-
oped the principles of U.S. foreign policy later called the MONROE DOC-
TRINE.
Monroe, Marilyn orig. Norma Jean Mortenson (b. June 1,
OF INFLUENCE. See also GOOD NEIGHBOR POLICY.
Monsarrat
Montale
Montesquieu
Montgomery (of Alamein), Bernard Law Montgomery, 1st
Montgomery, Wes orig. John Leslie Montgomery (b. March
See also DIRECT-MAIL MARKETING; SEARS, ROEBUCK AND COMPANY.
Montherlant
the signers of the Treaty of LAUSANNE and others met in Montreux, Switz.,
and agreed to return the zone to Turkish military control. The convention
allowed Turkey to close the straits to all warships when it was at war and
to permit merchant ships free passage. See also STRAITS QUESTION.
Montrose
Moore, Archie orig. Archibald Lee Wright (b. Dec. 13, 1913,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Moor (cid:2) moose
IMOGEN CUNNINGHAM
Marianne Moore, 1957
moraine
moray
Morgenthau
Morgan, Joe in full Joseph Leonard Morgan (b. Sept. 19, 1943,
Morisot
morphology
MORPHOLOGY.
Morpheus In Greek and Roman mythology, the god of dreams. He was
one of the sons of Hypnos (Somnus), god of sleep. Morpheus sent human
shapes of all kinds to the dreamer, while his brothers Phobetor and Phan-
tasus sent the forms of animals and inanimate objects.
morphine HETEROCYCLIC COMPOUND, NARCOTIC ANALGESIC ALKALOID originally
isolated from OPIUM. It is among the most powerful naturally occurring
CONVENTION and the CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION and served in the U.S.
DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI, EDWARD BURNE-
JONES, FORD MADOX BROWN, and oth-
THE MANSELL COLLECTION
William Morris, drawing by C.M.
Watts.
Morrison, Jim orig. James Douglas Morrison (b. Dec. 8, 1943,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Morris (cid:2) mortar
rock’s most potent, controversial, and theatrical acts. Their popular hits
of the 1960s included “Light My Fire” and “Hello I Love You.” Morri-
son was known for his drinking and drug use and outrageous stage behav-
iour. In 1971 he left the Doors to write poetry and moved to Paris, where
he died of heart failure.
Morrison, Toni orig. Chloe Anthony Wofford (b. Feb. 18, 1931,
Morristown National Historical Park Historical park, Morris-
Morse, Samuel F(inley) B(reese) (b. April 27, 1791, Charlestown,
Morton, James Douglas, 4th earl of (b. c. 1516—d. June 2, 1581,
Edinburgh, Scot.) Scottish nobleman. Appointed chancellor by MAR Y,
QUEEN OF SCOTS, in 1563, he conspired with other Protestant nobles to
murder Mary’s adviser DAVID RICCIO and probably was involved in the
murder of Lord DARNLEY. He led the nobles that drove Mary’s husband,
the earl of Bothwell, from Scotland and forced her to abdicate in favour
of her infant son, James (later JAMES I of England). He became regent for
James in 1572 and restored the rule of law to Scotland. Resented by the
other nobles, he was forced to resign in 1578; he was later charged with
complicity in Darnley’s murder and executed.
Morton, Jelly Roll orig. Ferdinand Joseph La Menthe (b. Oct.
Mosaddeq
centre of EASTERN ORTHODOXY, and the new prestige of the Russian Ortho-
dox church led to a new didactic iconography that expounded mysteries,
rites, and dogma. By the 17th century the STROGANOV SCHOOL of Moscow
artists assumed the leadership of Russian art.
Moscow State University in full Lomonosov Moscow State
Moselle River or Mosel River
shows clear ALTERNATION OF GENERATIONS between the sexual GAMETOPHYTE,
Mossad
many seriously damage forests, agricultural crops, and fabrics. See also
BAGWORM MOTH; GYPSY MOTH; HAWK MOTH; LUNA MOTH; MILLER; SATURNIID MOTH;
SILKWORM MOTH; TIGER MOTH; TUSSOCK MOTH.
ABSTRACT
EXPRESSIONISM from the
Motherwell, photograph by Arnold
Newman, 1959
MOTION; PERIODIC MOTION; SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION; SIMPLE MOTION; UNIFORM CIR-
CULAR MOTION.
© ARNOLD NEWMAN
Mother Goose (cid:2) motocross
MOUNT COMMUNICATIONS; RKO; UNITED ARTISTS; WARNER BROTHERS.
motion sickness Sickness caused by contradiction between external
data from the eyes and internal cues from the balance centre in the INNER
EAR. For example, in seasickness the inner ear senses the ship’s motion,
but the eyes see the still cabin. This stimulates stress hormones and accel-
erates stomach muscle contraction, leading to dizziness, pallor, cold
sweat, and nausea and vomiting. Minimizing changes of speed and direc-
tion may help, as may reclining, not turning the head, closing the eyes,
or focusing on distant objects. Drugs can prevent or relieve motion sick-
ness but may have side effects. Pressing an ACUPUNCTURE point on the wrist
helps some people.
motion study See TIME-AND-MOTION STUDY
ICS; HUMAN NATURE; LEARNING.
Motocross racing
KINNEY JONES
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
classes according to engine displacement (e.g., 125-, 250-, 500-cc). It is
probably the most physically demanding motorcycle sport.
Motoori Norinaga
Mountbatten family See BATTENBERG FAMILY
Mounties See ROYAL CANADIAN MOUNTED POLICE
POCKET
MOUSE.
mouse Hand-controlled electromechanical device for interacting with a
DIGITAL COMPUTER that has a GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE. The mouse can be moved
Mouskos, Mikhai Khristodolou See MAKARIOS III
Mousterian
mountain goat or Rocky Mountain goat RUMINANT (BOVID species
mountain lion See COUGAR
mountain sheep See BIGHORN
mountaineering or mountain climbing Sport of attaining, or
Mountbatten (of Burma), Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl orig.
Louis Francis Albert Victor Nicholas, prince of Battenberg
(b. June 25, 1900, Frogmore House, Windsor, Eng.—d. Aug. 27, 1979,
Donegal Bay, off Mullaghmore, County Sligo, Ire.) British statesman and
movie See MOTION PICTURE
Moynihan, Berkeley George Andrew later Baron Moyni-
han (of Leeds) (b. Oct. 2, 1865, Malta—d. Sept. 7, 1936, Carr Manor,
Leeds, Yorkshire, Eng.) British surgeon and teacher of medicine. He wrote
or cowrote authoritative monographs on surgery to treat diseases of vari-
ous abdominal organs, as well as Abdominal Operations (1905), a stan-
dard text for two decades, and Duodenal Ulcer (1910), which secured his
reputation as a clinical scientist. He stressed obtaining medical evidence
from living bodies on the operating table rather than from autopsies. He
helped found the British Journal of Surgery (1913) and organizations to
promote nationwide and international communication among surgeons
and specialists. He was raised to the peerage in 1929.
Moynihan, Daniel Patrick (b. March 16, 1927, Tulsa, Okla.,
U.S.—d. March 26, 2003, Washington, D.C.) U.S. scholar and politician.
He grew up in poverty in New York City. After serving in the U.S. navy
in World War II, he attended Tufts University, where he earned a doctor-
ate in 1961. From 1961 to 1965 he worked at the U.S. Labor Department,
where he cowrote a controversial report that attributed the educational
problems of African Americans to the instability of urban African Ameri-
can families. He taught at Harvard (1966–77) and held advisory posts in
the administration of RICHARD NIXON. He was ambassador to India (1973–
75) and U.S. representative to the UN (1975–76). He ran successfully for
the U.S. Senate from New York in 1976; though he was a Democrat, his
candidacy was opposed by many Democratic liberals. Reelected three
times, he retired in 2001. In 2000 he received the Presidential Medal of
Freedom.
Mozambique
MRI See MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
MS See MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
MS-DOS
clan shrine when the ancestral home was too small to accommodate all
its members and a new site had to be blessed. The main ceremony con-
sisted of taking ashes from the hearth of the ancestral shrine (kuala) and
transferring them to the shrine at the new location, which was then con-
sidered a subsidiary of the ancestral kuala.
mudra
chosen people, prompted his most famous disciple, MALCOLM X, to break
with the group in 1964. He moderated his views in his later years.
Mueammad !Abd al-Ra#)f al-Qudwah al-husaynl See Y0SIR
!ARAF0T
Mueammad !All (b. 1769, Kavala, Macedonia, Ottoman Empire—d.
Aug. 2, 1849, Alexandria, Egypt) Viceroy of Egypt (1805–48) for the
OTTOMAN EMPIRE and founder of the dynasty that ruled Egypt until 1953.
He reorganized Egyptian society in the aftermath of the Napoleonic occu-
pation, eliminating the remnants of the MamlHks (see MAMLãK DYNASTY),
restricting native merchants and artisans, and stamping out peasant rebel-
lions. He nationalized most land, introduced the cultivation of cash crops,
and attempted to develop modern industry, but his efforts were under-
mined by a lack of trained workers, the deleterious effects of excessive
taxation, and a common disaffection with peasant conscription. He suc-
ceeded in securing for his family the hereditary right to rule Egypt and
The Sudan (1841), which opened the way to eventual independence from
Ottoman domination. See also !ABB0S I.
Mueammad ibn !Abd al-Karlm al-Kha$$)bl See ABD EL-KRIM
Mueammad ibn Tughluq
mullah
Mumbai
Munda
Asia and introduced into England and France, that constitute the genus
Muntiacus (family Cervidae). Named for their cry, most species stand
15–25 in. (40–65 cm) high, weigh 33–77 lbs (15–35 kg), and are gray-
ish, reddish, or brown. Males have tusklike upper canine teeth and short
one-branched antlers. Bony ridges extend from the antler base onto the
face. The giant muntjac (88–110 lbs, or 40–50 kg) was discovered in
northern Vietnam in 1993–94. Fea’s muntjac (M. feae), of Myanmar and
Thailand, is endangered, and other muntjac species are threatened.
Müntzer
MureÃ
murre
TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY (TVA). The city of Muscle Shoals (pop., 2000:
11,924) developed from the TVA complex in the Wilson Dam area.
muscle tumour Abnormal tissue growth in or originating from MUSCLE
tissue. There are three major types. Leiomyomas are tumours of smooth
muscles, seen most often in the uterus but also in the digestive, urinary,
and female genital systems. Part of the tumour may become malignant,
but it usually does not spread or recur. Rhabdomyomas occur most often
in cardiac muscle. Some forms spread, and it may remain contained in
tissue or become diffuse and hard to remove. Rhabdomyomas involving
both smooth and striated muscle are often malignant and may grow very
large. The several types of rhabdomyosarcoma are rare; they arise in skel-
etal muscle, usually in the leg or arm, and are extremely malignant.
muscovite
one of the game’s great hitters. His
lifetime totals of hits (3,630), runs
(1,949), and times at bat were second
only to those of TY COBB, his total of
runs batted in (1,951) was the fourth-
highest of all time, and his total of
extra-base hits (1,477) was only sur-
passed later by HANK AARON. Popular
among fans for his unfailing gra-
ciousness, he became a Cardinals
executive after retirement.
music Art concerned with combin-
ing vocal or instrumental sounds for
beauty of form or emotional expres-
sion, usually according to cultural
standards of rhythm, melody, and, in
most Western music,
Music most often implies sounds
with distinct PITCHes that are arranged
into MELODIES and organized into pat-
terns of RHYTHM AND METRE. The melody will usually be in a certain KEY or
MODE, and in Western music it will often suggest harmony that may be
made explicit as accompanying CHORDs or COUNTERPOINT. Music is an art
that, in one guise or another, permeates every human society. It is used
for such varied social purposes as ritual, worship, coordination of move-
ment, communication, and entertainment.
music box Mechanical musical instrument in which projecting pins on
a revolving brass cylinder or disk, encoding a piece of music, pluck tuned
PICTORIAL PARADE-EB INC.
HARMONY.
Musial
A mushroom typically consists of a stalk (stipe) and a cap (pileus). As the mushroom
develops from an underground mycelium and pushes upward, it is protected by a
thin membrane (universal veil), which eventually ruptures, leaving fragments on the
cap. Another membrane, attaching the cap to the stalk, also ruptures, allowing the
cap to expand and leaving a remnant ring (annulus) on the stalk. Radiating rows of
gills are found on the cap’s undersurface; these bear the club-shaped reproductive
structures (basidia) which form minute spores known as basidiospores, of which a
single mushroom may produce millions.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
music (cid:2) musicology
steel
tongues.
It was probably
invented c. 1780 in Switzerland.
With its modular cylinders or disks,
it was a popular domestic instrument
until displaced by the player piano
and phonograph.
music hall and variety the-
COURTESY OF THE MUSICAL WONDER HOUSE, WISCASSET,
MAINE; PHOTOGRAPH, JOHN SPINKS
German music box, with disk in play-
ing position, from Leipzig, c. 1900
atre Popular entertainment that fea-
tured successive acts by singers,
comedians, dancers, and actors. The
form derived from the taproom con-
certs given in city taverns in England
in the 18th–19th centuries. To meet
the demand for entertainment for the working class, tavern owners often
annexed nearby buildings as music halls, where drinking and smoking
were permitted. The originator of the English music hall as such was
Charles Morton, who built Morton’s Canterbury Hall (1852) and Oxford
Hall (1861) in London. Leading performers included LILLIE LANGTR Y, Harry
Lauder (1870–1950), and GRACIE FIELDS. Music halls evolved into larger,
more respectable variety theatres, such as London’s Hippodrome and the
Coliseum. Variety acts combined music, comedy acts, and one-act plays
and featured celebrities such as SARAH BERNHARDT and HERBERT TREE. See also
VAUDEVILLE.
GERSHWIN and IRA GERSHWIN, COLE PORTER, RICHARD RODGERS, and OSCAR HAM-
muskellunge
on GAMAL ABDEL NASSER, it operated clandestinely in the 1960s and ’70s.
Beginning in the late 1980s, it experienced an upsurge; though its can-
didates were often listed under other parties, Brotherhood candidates com-
peted in legislative elections in Egypt and Jordan.
Muslim calendar See Muslim CALENDAR
Muslim League orig. All India Muslim League Political group
Musset
rial of EVOLUTION.
Mu!tazilah
mycelium
family Myrtaceae, commonly called the myrtle family, includes the plants
that produce the spices ALLSPICE and CLOVES, and the genus Eucalyptus. See
also CRAPE MYRTLE.
Mysore
NAACP in full National Association for the Advancement
Nabis
sus Mountains. Suspicious of those around him and capriciously cruel, he
was assassinated by his own troops.
NAFTA in full North American Free Trade Agreement Trade
pact signed by Canada, the U.S., and Mexico in 1992, which took effect
in 1994. Inspired by the success of the EUROPEAN COMMUNITY in reducing
trade barriers among its members, NAFTA created the world’s largest
free-trade area. It basically extended to Mexico the provisions of a 1988
Canada-U.S. free-trade agreement, calling for elimination of all trade bar-
riers over a 15-year period, granting U.S. and Canadian companies access
to certain Mexican markets, and incorporating agreements on labour and
the environment. See also GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE; WORLD
TRADE ORGANIZATION.
Nag Hammadi
nahual See NAGUAL
Nahuatl
century. It is the area’s commercial centre and site of the Wat Mahathudu
temple complex. The town is noted for its NIELLO work in silver.
Nalanda
Nanda dynasty Family that ruled Magadha, in northern India (c.
343–c. 321 BC). Legends regarding the low-class origins and ruthless con-
quests of its founder, Mahapadma, are supported by classical scholarship.
The brief period of Nanda rule, along with the succeeding and more
lengthy tenure of the MAUR YAN EMPIRE, represent the political aspect of a
great transitional epoch in which settled agriculture and the growing use
of iron resulted in production surpluses and the growth of cities. There
are references to the wealth of the Nandas, their sizable military, and
administrative initiatives such as irrigation projects.
Nanga Parbat
Napata
ULM and AUSTERLITZ (1805), JENA AND AUERSTEDT (1806), and FRIEDLAND (1807)
nappe
Narmada River
Nashe
nasturtium
National Aeronautics and Space Administration See NASA
National Assembly French Assemblée Nationale French par-
National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People See NAACP
National Basketball Association (NBA) U.S. professional bas-
ketball league. It was formed in 1949 by the merger of two rival orga-
nizations,
the National Basketball League (founded 1937) and the
Basketball Association of America (1946). In 1976 the NBA was aug-
mented by the absorption of four teams from the former American Bas-
ketball Association (founded 1967). The NBA membership is divided into
two conferences, each with three divisions. The Eastern Conference con-
sists of the Atlantic Division (Boston Celtics, New Jersey Nets, New York
Knicks, Philadelphia 76ers, Toronto Raptors), the Central Division (Chi-
cago Bulls, Cleveland Cavaliers, Detroit Pistons, Indiana Pacers, Mil-
waukee Bucks), and the Southeast Division (Atlanta Hawks, Charlotte
Bobcats, Miami Heat, Orlando Magic, Washington Wizards). The West-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Nation (cid:2) National Film Board of Canada
National Broadcasting Company See NBC
National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Organiza-
National Convention French Convention Nationale Govern-
and employment. See also DEFICIT FINANCING; JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES.
National Education Association (NEA) Voluntary association of
U.S. teachers, administrators, and other educators associated with elemen-
tary and secondary schools and colleges and universities. Founded in 1857
as the National Teachers Assn., it is among the world’s largest profes-
sional organizations. Operating much like a LABOUR UNION, it represents its
members through numerous state and local affiliates. It seeks to improve
the schools and working conditions, advance the cause of public educa-
tion, promote federal legislation, and sponsor research.
National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) Independent agency of
National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) U.S. inde-
pendent agency. Founded in 1965, it supports research, education, pres-
ervation, and public programs in the HUMANITIES. It provides grants to
museums, libraries, archives, television programs, historic sites, transla-
tion and editorial projects by academic presses, educational and research
institutions, and individuals.
National Film Board of Canada (NFB) Canadian department of
1332 I National Football League (cid:2) National League
SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION. It was founded in 1937 when ANDREW W. MELLON
JACQUES-YVES COUSTEAU, JANE GOODALL, and DIAN FOSSEY. It has published
numerous books, atlases, and bulletins and has created hundreds of tele-
vision documentaries. National Geographic Magazine is a monthly maga-
zine of geography, archaeology, anthropology, and exploration. It became
a leader in reproducing colour photographs and printing photographs of
undersea life, views from the stratosphere, and animals in their natural
habitats. It also became famous for articles containing substantial infor-
mation on environmental, social, and cultural aspects of the regions cov-
ered. See also GILBERT GROSVENOR.
National Guard, U.S. Reserve group organized by the U.S. Army
and Air Force. Every state and territory of the U.S. has a National Guard,
which can be called on by state governors during emergencies such as
riots and natural disasters. Guard units may also be ordered into active
duty for up to two years by the U.S. president in the event of a national
emergency. Enlistment in the National Guard is voluntary.
National Health Service (NHS) Comprehensive government
public-health service in Britain covering virtually the entire population,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
the STANLEY CUP.
National Institutes of Health (NIH) U.S. government agency that
conducts or supports biomedical research. It is made up of numerous spe-
cialized institutes (e.g., National Cancer Institute; National Heart, Lung,
and Blood Institute; National Institute on Aging; National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development; and National Institute of Mental
Health). Part of the Department of Health and Human Services, it also
trains health researchers; disseminates information; and maintains other
offices and divisions, the National Library of Medicine (the foremost
source of medical information in the U.S.), and several research centres.
National Labor Relations Act See WAGNER ACT
National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) U.S. government
agency charged with administering the National Labor Relations Act
(1935). The three-member NLRB, appointed by the president, organizes
elections to determine whether employees wish to be represented by a
LABOUR UNION in COLLECTIVE BARGAINING and monitors labour practices by
employers and unions. It does not initiate investigations; its involvement
must be sought by employers, individuals, or unions. Though it lacks
enforcement power for its orders, it can prosecute cases in court.
National League (NL) Oldest existing U.S. major-league profes-
sional baseball organization. The league was founded in 1876. Its
supremacy was challenged by several rival organizations over the years,
of which only the AMERICAN LEAGUE has survived; beginning in 1903, the
champions of the two leagues have engaged in an annual WORLD SERIES
competition. Today the National League consists of 16 teams aligned in
three divisions. In the Eastern Division are the Atlanta Braves, Florida
Marlins (Miami), New York Mets, Philadelphia Phillies, and Washington
(D.C.) Nationals. In the Central Division are the Chicago Cubs, Cincin-
nati Reds, Houston Astros, Milwaukee Brewers, Pittsburgh Pirates, and
St. Louis Cardinals. In the Western Division are the Arizona Diamond-
backs (Phoenix), Colorado Rockies (Denver), Los Angeles Dodgers, San
Diego Padres, and San Francisco Giants.
National Liberal Party German Nationalliberale Partei
SANDINISTAS.
National Organization for Women (NOW) U.S. women’s
National Party in full National Party of South Africa South
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
National Liberal Party (cid:2) National Socialism I
National Recovery Administration (NRA) (1933–35) U.S. gov-
ernment agency established to stimulate business recovery during the
GREAT DEPRESSION. As part of the National Industrial Recovery Act (1933),
the NRA established codes to eliminate unfair trade practices, reduce
unemployment, and set minimum wages and maximum hours. The U.S.
Supreme Court
invalidated the act
in 1935 because it gave quasi-
legislative powers to the executive branch. Many of its provisions
appeared in subsequent legislation.
National Republican Party U.S. political party formed after the
Jeffersonian Republicans split
in 1825. The National Republicans
included followers of JOHN QUINCY ADAMS and HENR Y CLAY and opponents
of ANDREW JACKSON. Adams, the incumbent president, ran as the party’s
unsuccessful candidate in the 1828 presidential election. Its 1832 presi-
dential nominee was Clay, whose platform endorsing a high tariff, inter-
nal improvements, and the BANK OF THE UNITED STATES (see BANK WAR). After
losing again to Jackson, the party joined with conservatives and other
anti-Jackson forces to form the WHIG PARTY.
National Rifle Association (NRA) Governing organization for the
National Security Council (NSC) U.S. agency that advises the
Nationalist Party or Kuomintang or Guomindang
Natural Bridges National Monument National monument,
southeastern Utah, U.S. Comprising three large natural bridges carved by
two winding streams, it was established in 1908. The largest bridge,
Sipapu, is 222 ft (68 m) high and spans 261 ft (80 m). Pictographs were
carved on another of the bridges, Kachina, by early cliff dwellers.
natural childbirth Any of the systems (e.g., the Lamaze method) of
managing birth without drugs or surgery. All begin with classes to teach
pregnant women about the birth process, including when to push and what
breathing and relaxation techniques to use at which stage. The goal is to
reduce fear and muscle tension, which can increase the pain of labour,
and to make the mother an active participant in the process. The father
or another partner usually attends the classes with the mother and coaches
her during the birth. See also MIDWIFER Y; OBSTETRICS AND GYNECOLOGY.
natural law In JURISPRUDENCE and POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY, a system of right
or justice common to all humankind and derived from nature rather than
from the rules of society, or positive law. The concept can be traced to
ARISTOTLE, who held that what was “just by nature” was not always the
same as what was “just by law.” In one form or another, the existence of
natural law was asserted by the Stoics (see STOICISM), CICERO, the Roman
jurists, St. PAUL, St. AUGUSTINE, GRATIAN, St. THOMAS AQUINAS, JOHN DUNS
of reality: DUALISM and MONISM, ATHEISM and THEISM, IDEALISM and materialism
nature/nurture controversy See BEHAVIOUR GENETICS
Naucratis
trade and cultural relations between Greece and Egypt. It declined after
ALEXANDER THE GREAT’s conquest of Egypt and the founding of ALEXANDRIA
in 332 BC. In 1884 archaeologist FLINDERS PETRIE discovered the site and
helped excavate it.
Nauru
Navarra English Navarre
Nazarene
Nebuchadnezzar II See NEBUCHADREZZAR II
Nebuchadrezzar
taining canvas stamped with a design and all the materials needed for the
project, were sold as early as the mid-18th century. See also BARGELLO.
Nefertiti
Neilson
WICCA.
Neo-Thomism
works of MARTIN HEIDEGGER.
Neo-Paganism Any of several movements that attempt to revive the
polytheistic religions of Europe and the Middle East. Largely a product
materials to form the active elements for certain solid-state LASERS. Glass
containing a mixture of neodymium and praseodymium (another rare
earth element) is used in glassblowers’ goggles.
neofascism Political philosophy and movement that arose in Europe
in the decades following World War II. Like earlier fascist movements,
neofascism advocated extreme nationalism, opposed liberal individual-
ism, attacked Marxist and other left-wing ideologies, indulged in racist
and xenophobic scapegoating, and promoted populist right-wing eco-
nomic programs. Unlike the fascists, however, neofascists placed more
blame for their countries’ problems on non-European immigrants than on
leftists and Jews, displayed little interest in taking lebensraum (German:
“living space”) through the military conquest of other states, and made
concerted efforts to portray themselves as democratic and “mainstream.”
The National Front in France, led by JEAN-MARIE LE PEN, and the Liberal-
Democratic Party in Russia, led by Vladimir Zhirinovsky, are often cited
as neofascist.
Neolithic
but more common of the two types of JADE and may be distinguished from
JADEITE by its splintery fracture and oily lustre. Nephrite occurs in low-
grade (formed under low-temperature, low-pressure conditions), region-
ally metamorphosed rocks. Important deposits occur in China, Siberia,
New Zealand, Switzerland, Alaska, and Wyoming.
nephritis
destroyed much of Rome; he perse-
cuted the Christians as scapegoats
and proceeded to build a garish pal-
ace, the Domus Aurea, on lands that
had been privately held. With his
reign in decline, he murdered his
wife, Octavia, as well as her succes-
sor, Poppaea, ordered Seneca to kill
himself, and executed senators who
criticized him. Revolts in Gaul and
Spain were led by GALBA, who was
declared emperor by his army. Nero
came to be regarded as mad, giving
public lyre and theatrical perfor-
mances to the disgust of his subjects.
Condemned by the Senate, he chose
suicide over execution.
Nerses
1346 I
nest (cid:2) Netherlands
JEFF FOOTT/BRUCE COLEMAN INC.
Nest of the American robin.
Netherlands, Austrian See AUSTRIAN NETHERLANDS
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
byname Holland Country, northwestern Europe. Area: 16,034 sq mi
(41,528 sq km). Population (2005 est.): 16,300,000. Capital: AMSTERDAM.
MAS à Kempis, and DESIDERIUS ERASMUS. CALVINISM and ANABAPTIST doctrines
attracted many followers. In 1581 the seven northern provinces, led by
Calvinists, declared their independence from Spain, and in 1648, follow-
ing the THIRTY YEARS’ WAR, Spain recognized Dutch independence. The 17th
century was the golden age of Dutch civilization. Benedict de SPINOZA and
RENÉ DESCARTES enjoyed the intellectual freedom, and REMBRANDT and
JOHANNES VERMEER painted their masterpieces. The Dutch EAST INDIA CO.
Netherlands Antilles
neuralgia
Neusiedler
New Britain formerly Neu-Pommern
New England Region, northeastern U.S. It consists of the states of
Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Con-
necticut and has an area of 66,667 sq mi (172,668 sq km). Named by
JOHN SMITH, who explored its shores in 1614, it was later settled by English
Puritans (see PURITANISM). The New England colonies, fueled by self-
sufficient farmers, evolved representative governments. The area’s numer-
ous harbours soon promoted the growth of overseas commerce and a
vigorous shipbuilding industry. In the 18th century it became a hotbed of
agitation for independence from Britain, and its patriots played leading
roles in the AMERICAN REVOLUTION.
New England Confederation or United Colonies of New
England Organization of four American colonies. In 1643 delegates
from Massachusetts, Connecticut, New Haven, and Plymouth met to solve
trade, boundary, and religious disputes and to form a common defense
against the French, Dutch, and Indians. They drew up articles of agree-
ment and established a directorate of eight commissioners. The confed-
eration was weakened by its advisory status and by the 1665 merger of
Connecticut and New Haven. It was active in KING PHILIP’S WAR but dis-
solved in 1684 when the Massachusetts charter was revoked.
New England Range Upland area, northeastern NEW SOUTH WALES,
Australia. Part of the GREAT DIVIDING RANGE, it stretches about 200 mi (320
km) parallel to the eastern coast, constituting Australia’s largest plateau
region. The highest point, Round Mountain, is 5,300 ft (1,615 m). New
England National Park, on the eastern slope of the range, is one of sev-
eral semitropical and temperate rainforest areas designated a UNESCO
WORLD HERITAGE SITE in 1986.
New England Renaissance See AMERICAN RENAISSANCE
the explorations by SAMUEL DE CHAMPLAIN, JACQUES MARQUETTE, LA SALLE, LOUIS
New Guinea Indonesian Irian
1352 I New Model Army (cid:2) New Spain
New Orleans jazz See DIXIELAND
New Realism Early 20th-century movement in METAPHYSICS and EPISTE-
MOLOGY that opposed the IDEALISM dominant in British and U.S. universi-
ties. Early leaders included WILLIAM JAMES, BERTRAND RUSSELL, and G. E.
MOORE, who adopted the term REALISM to signal their opposition to ideal-
ism. In 1910 William Pepperel Montague, Ralph Barton Perry, and oth-
ers signed an article entitled “The Program and First Platform of Six
Realists,” and followed it with a cooperative volume, The New Realism
(1912). In defending the independence of known things, New Realism
affirmed that in cognition “the content of knowledge, that which lies in
or before the mind when knowledge takes place, is numerically identical
with the thing known” (a form of direct realism). To some realists, this
epistemological MONISM seemed unable to give a satisfactory explanation
of the mind’s proneness to error.
new religious movement (NRM) Any religion originating in
New School University formerly New School for Social
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
TRUFFAUT, JEAN-LUC GODARD, LOUIS MALLE, ERIC ROHMER, ALAIN RESNAIS, and oth-
CHIN MONKEYS and SQUIRREL MONKEYS; and the durukulis. See also OLD WORLD
MONKEY.
New Year’s Day First day of the new year, celebrated with religious,
cultural, and social observances around the world. It is usually marked by
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
New Sweden (cid:2) New York City
New York, State University of (SUNY) Largest university sys-
TALLCHIEF, EDWARD VILLELLA, JACQUES D’AMBOISE, and SUZANNE FARRELL.
York. See also ACTION PAINTING.
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) World’s largest marketplace
also AMERICAN STOCK EXCHANGE; NASDAQ.
Newar
Newark
1356 I Newport (cid:2) Newton
news agency or news service or wire service Organization that
gathers, writes, and distributes news to newspapers, periodicals, radio and
television broadcasters, government agencies, and other users. It does not
publish news itself but supplies news to subscribers, who, by sharing
costs, obtain services they could not otherwise afford. All the mass media
depend on agencies for the bulk of the news they carry. Some agencies
focus on special subjects or on a local area or nation. Many news agen-
cies are cooperatives, with members providing news from their area to a
pool for general use. The largest news agencies are United Press Inter-
national, ASSOCIATED PRESS, REUTERS, and AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Warty newt (Triturus cristatus)
TONI ANGERMAYER
Newtown Saint Boswells
Nguni were dispersed from their original homeland in what is now East-
ern Cape province and KwaZulu-Natal by the MFECANE disturbances of
the 1820s and the expansion of European power.
Nguyen
Nicias
Nicholas II Russian Nikolay Aleksandrovich (b. May 18, 1868,
Nicholas V orig. Tommaso Parentucelli (b. Nov. 15, 1397, Sar-
Nichols, Mike orig. Michael Igor Peschkowsky (b. Nov. 6,
Nicopolis
Niemöller
important are the POTATO, EGGPLANT, TOMATO, garden PEPPER, TOBACCO, and
nihilism
STRASSER.
THRUSH).
Nightingale, Florence (b. May 12, 1820, Florence, Italy—d. Aug.
13, 1910, London, Eng.) Italian-born British nurse, founder of trained
nursing as a profession. As a volunteer nurse, she was put in charge of
their own company, he and his sister, BRONISLAVA NIJINSKA, trained further
in St. Petersburg, and he joined the MARIINSKY THEATRE company in 1907.
With his spectacular leaps and unrivaled grace, he was an immediate suc-
cess, dancing leading roles in Giselle, Swan Lake, and Sleeping Beauty,
often with ANNA PAVLOVA and TAMARA KARSAVINA. In 1909 he joined the new
BALLETS RUSSES, and he created many roles in MICHEL FOKINE’s ballets, includ-
ing Carnaval, Les Sylphides, Le Spectre de la rose, Petrushka, and Daph-
nis and Chloe. In 1912–13 he choreographed The Afternoon of a Faun,
Jeux, and The Rite of Spring, all of which caused scandals. His marriage
in 1913 led to his dismissal from the company by his mentor, SERGEY
DIAGHILEV. He continued to perform but with less success. His intensify-
ing mental illness led to his retirement in 1919, and he lived mostly in
mental institutions in Switzerland, France, and England until his death.
His status as a legend is unequaled in the history of dance.
Nijmegen
Nimeiri
plains and Nebraska’s sandhills and low plains, it joins the MISSOURI RIVER
at the village of Niobrara, Neb., at the South Dakota line. It is 431 mi
(694 km) long. The AGATE FOSSIL BEDS NATIONAL MONUMENT is located on
the river, north of Scottsbluff, Neb.
Nipigon
structure (see HETEROCYCLIC COMPOUND). See also NITROGEN CYCLE.
nitrogen narcosis or nitrogen euphoria or raptures of the
deep Effects of breathing nitrogen under increased pressure. In divers
breathing compressed air, nitrogen saturates the nervous system, causing
an intoxicating light-headed, numb feeling, then slowed reasoning and
dexterity, and then emotional instability and irrationality. Severe cases
progress to convulsions and blackout. Susceptibility varies, and severity
increases with depth, but there are no aftereffects. Physical function
remains normal, and divers may be unaware of the growing irrationality
that can cause them to rise too fast (see DECOMPRESSION SICKNESS) or let their
air supply run out. Helium, which dissolves less easily in body tissues, is
substituted for nitrogen for deep dives.
nitroglycerin
Njáls
in the House of Commons (1929–31, 1936–70)
and in ministerial posts (1945–61). He helped
draft the UN charter, and he campaigned widely
for peace through multilateral disarmament. An
Olympic runner in 1912, 1920, and 1924, he
later served as president of UNESCO’s Inter-
national Council on Sport and Physical Recre-
ation (1960–82). In 1959 he was awarded the
Nobel Prize for Peace.
Nogi Maresuke
nökhör
they also disburse. See also AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL; GREENPEACE; WORLD
WILDLIFE FUND.
Nonni River See NEN RIVER
Nono, Luigi (b. Jan. 29, 1924, Venice, Italy—d. May 8, 1990, Venice)
Italian composer. A law student, he also studied music with Gian
Francesco Malipiero (1882–1973), Bruno Maderna (1920–73), and Her-
mann Scherchen (1891–1966). He came to public attention in 1950 with
his work Variazioni Canoniche, orchestral variations on a 12-tone theme
of ARNOLD SCHOENBERG, whose daughter Nuria he married in 1955. An
avowed communist, Nono often produced works of political substance,
many of which sparked controversy and reaction. He employed aleatory
(chance) techniques and SERIALISM, sometimes fragmenting language and
using electronically manipulated sounds. His best-known work is the
opera Intolleranza (1961).
nonobjective art See ABSTRACT ART
Nonpartisan League Alliance of U.S. farmers to gain protection
from wheat monopolies. Founded in North Dakota in 1915 by Arthur
Townley,
it demanded that mills, grain elevators, banks, and hail-
insurance companies be state owned. In 1916 its candidate, Lynn Frazier,
was elected governor of North Dakota, and the state legislature enacted
its program in 1919. The league declined after the 1920s and affiliated
with the Democrats in 1956.
nonrepresentational art See ABSTRACT ART
nonsense verse Humorous or whimsical verse that features absurd
characters and actions and often contains evocative but meaningless
words coined for the verse. It is unlike the ritualistic gibberish of chil-
dren’s counting-out rhymes in that it makes such words sound purpose-
ful. It differs from other comic verse in its resistance to any rational or
allegorical interpretation. Most nonsense verse has been written for chil-
dren and is modern, dating from the beginning of the 19th century.
Examples include EDWARD LEAR’s Book of Nonsense (1846), LEWIS CARROLL’s
“Jabberwocky” (1871), and HILAIRE BELLOC’s Bad Child’s Book of Beasts
(1896). See also LIMERICK.
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs See NSAIDS
Nootka
Noriega
Norodom Sihanouk
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
lowing the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR, it annulled the secession order and abol-
ished slavery, and it was readmitted to the Union in 1868. In the 1940s
its economy improved as some of the nation’s largest military installa-
tions, including Fort Bragg, were located there. It has a large rural popu-
lation but is also the leading industrial state of its region, and it has an
expanding high technology industry in the Raleigh-Durham area. Prod-
ucts include tobacco, corn, and furniture.
North Carolina, Regulators of See REGULATORS of North Carolina
North Cascades National Park National park, northwestern
North Star See POLARIS
Northampton, Henry Howard, earl of (b. Feb. 25, 1540, Shot-
tesham, Norfolk, Eng.—d. June 15, 1614, London) English noble noted
for his intrigues in the reigns of ELIZABETH I and JAMES I. Younger brother of
the 4th duke of NORFOLK, he was implicated in efforts to free MAR Y, QUEEN
OF SCOTS. He successfully sought favour with the Scottish king James VI,
who, on his accession as James I of England, made Howard a privy coun-
cillor (1603) and earl of Northampton (1604). As a judge at the trials of
WALTER RALEIGH (1603) and GUY FAWKES (1605), he pressed for conviction.
Northamptonshire
houses from as early as the 13th century. The county was largely pro-
Parliament during the ENGLISH CIVIL WARS. It combines traditional rural life
with a modern economy of varied industries in centres such as NORTHAMP-
TON, the county seat, and Corby.
Northcliffe (of Saint Peter), Alfred Charles William Harms-
Northern Dvina
Northern Wei dynasty or Toba dynasty (AD 386–534/35)
Northrop
Norway lobster See SCAMPI
Norwich
sula on the northern Honshu coast, it extends north for 50 mi (80 km) and
has a width of about 19 mi (30 km). The town of Wajima, on the pen-
insula’s northern coast, is known for its women pearl divers and its pro-
duction of elaborate lacquerware. Parts of the peninsula were designated
national park land in 1968.
Nôtre, André Le See André LE NÔTRE
Notre Dame, University of Private university in Notre Dame, near
South Bend, Indiana, U.S. It was founded in 1842 and reorganized in the
1920s; it became coeducational in 1972. It is affiliated with the Roman
Catholic church. It has colleges of arts and letters, science, engineering,
and business administration. It also has a graduate school and a law
school.
Notre-Dame de Paris
Novara
natural rights of its citizens. Nozick emphasized that the minimal state as
he envisioned it could encompass smaller communities in which the cen-
tral public authority would have more than minimal powers. Because each
such community would be free to realize its own idea of the good soci-
ety, the minimal state, according to Nozick, constitutes a “framework for
utopia.”
NPR See NATIONAL PUBLIC RADIO
NRA See NATIONAL RECOVER Y ADMINISTRATION, NATIONAL RIFLE ASSN.
NSAIDs
construction and operation of nuclear reactors and other facilities and the
ownership and use of nuclear materials. It issues standards, rules, and
regulations for the maintenance of licenses, and it regularly inspects
nuclear facilities to ensure compliance with public health and safety, envi-
ronmental quality, national security, and antitrust laws. The NRC also
investigates nuclear accidents, conducts public hearings, and reviews
power-plant operations. Its commissioners are appointed by the president
of the U.S.
Under Water Treaty that prohibits all tests of NUCLEAR WEAPONs except
those conducted underground. U.S.-Soviet test-ban talks began after con-
cerns arose in the 1940s and ’50s about the dangers of radioactive fallout
from above-ground nuclear tests. These talks made little progress until
the CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS of 1962. In the following year, Britain, the U.S.,
and the Soviet Union signed the treaty, and more than 100 other govern-
ments soon followed. France and China were notable nonsignatories. In
1996 the treaty was replaced by the Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty,
which will not take effect until it is signed by all 44 countries with nuclear
power plants. India refuses to do so on the ground that the treaty lacks
disarmament provisions and permits nonexplosive testing. See also
NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY.
nuclear weapon or atomic weapon or thermonuclear
weapon Bomb or other warhead that derives its force from NUCLEAR FIS-
SION, NUCLEAR FUSION, or both and is delivered by an aircraft, missile, or
other system. Fission weapons, commonly known as ATOMIC BOMBs, release
energy by splitting the nuclei of uranium or plutonium atoms; fusion
weapons, known as HYDROGEN BOMBs or thermonuclear bombs, fuse nuclei
of the hydrogen isotopes tritium or deuterium. Most modern nuclear
weapons actually combine both processes. Nuclear weapons are the most
potent explosive devices ever invented. Their destructive effects include
not only a blast equivalent to thousands of tons of TNT but also blinding
light, searing heat, and lethal radioactive FALLOUT. The number of nuclear
weapons reached its peak in the 1980s, when the U.S. had some 33,000
and the Soviet Union 38,000. Since the end of the Cold War both coun-
tries have decommissioned or dismantled thousands of warheads. Other
declared nuclear powers are the United Kingdom, France, China, India,
and Pakistan. Israel is widely assumed to possess nuclear weapons, and
North Korea, Iran, and Iraq often have been accused of seeking to build
them. Some countries, such as South Africa, Brazil, and Argentina, have
acknowledged pursuing nuclear weapons in the past but have abandoned
their programs. See also NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY; NUCLEAR TEST-
BAN TREATY.
nucleic
See also COMPUTED AXIAL TOMOGRAPHY; DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING; POSITRON EMISSION
TOMOGRAPHY; RADIATION THERAPY; RADIOLOGY.
NUCLEAR TEST-BAN TREATY.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) U.S. independent REGU-
LATOR Y AGENCY that oversees the civilian use of nuclear energy. Established
in 1974 to replace the Atomic Energy Commission, the NRC licenses the
nucleoprotein
Numidia
tribes in his immediate area. During this time, he also established a Man-
chu state and enlisted the scholar Erdeni to create a Manchu writing sys-
tem. He organized his troops under the BANNER SYSTEM. In 1616 Nurhachi
proclaimed himself KHAN and called his dynasty Jin, harking back to the
Juchen Jin dynasty of the 12th century. In 1626 he was defeated by the
Chinese and died of battle wounds. See also HONGTAIJI; QING DYNASTY.
N)rl al-Sa!ld
nymphaeum
ied with the intent of causing harm, are sometimes called obia. A person
who uses the power of obia is called an obiama or obiaman.
object-oriented programming (OOP) Computer programming
Obote
VIOLET RADIATION, X-RAYs) from above the ATMOSPHERE. STONEHENGE may have
observatories include ARECIBO OBSERVATOR Y; MOUNT WILSON OBSERVATOR Y;
PALOMAR OBSERVATOR Y; and ROYAL GREENWICH OBSERVATOR Y.
obsessive-compulsive disorder Mental disorder in which an indi-
vidual experiences obsessions or compulsions, either singly or together.
An obsession is a persistent disturbing preoccupation with an unreason-
able idea or feeling (such as of being contaminated through shaking hands
with someone). A compulsion is an irresistible impulse to perform an irra-
tional act (such as repeatedly washing the hands). The two phenomena
are usually, but not always, linked in the obsessive-compulsive person.
Onset of the illness has been linked to malregulation of the neurotrans-
mitter SEROTONIN as well as to the ill effects of high STRESS.
obsidian Natural glass of volcanic origin that is formed by the rapid
cooling of viscous LAVA. It has a glassy lustre and is slightly harder than
window glass. It is typically jet black, but the presence of hematite (iron
oxide) produces red and brown varieties, and tiny gas bubbles may cre-
ate a golden sheen. It is sometimes used as a semiprecious stone. Obsid-
ian was used by American Indians and others for weapons, implements,
tools, and ornaments, and by the ancient Aztecs and Greeks for mirrors.
obstetrics and gynecology
ocean perch See REDFISH
Oceania
the U.S. wanted to end the Occupation in 1947, the Soviet Union vetoed
a peace treaty with Japan; a treaty was signed in 1951, and the Occupa-
tion ended the following year.
occupational disease Illness associated with a particular occupation.
The Industrial Revolution’s long working hours, dim light, lack of fresh
air, and dangerous machinery fostered illness and injury in general, but
certain occupations (e.g., mining) carry particular risks (e.g., black lung,
a type of PNEUMOCONIOSIS). Twentieth-century innovations (including use
of new chemicals and radioactive materials) caused an increase in certain
cancers (e.g., leukemia and bone cancer in workers exposed to radiation)
and injuries. So-called “sick buildings” (in which pathogens grow in air
circulation systems) contribute to health problems among office workers.
Occupational medicine also covers work-related emotional stresses. See
also ASBESTOSIS; INDUSTRIAL MEDICINE.
occupational medicine See INDUSTRIAL MEDICINE
occupational therapy Use of activities to promote health and inde-
pendence, particularly after the acute phase of illness. Such therapy is often
vital for reorienting patients unable to work for long periods. Occupational
therapists assess patients’ abilities, tailor programs to restore physical
function, and devise ways to help those with permanent limitations carry
out everyday functions. See also PHYSICAL MEDICINE AND REHABILITATION.
occupational training See EMPLOYEE TRAINING
oceanic
the existence of an entity, then philosophers and scientists should not
assume the entity’s existence. The history of science provides many
examples of the principle’s application (e.g., the rejection by scientists of
the hypothesis of a luminiferous ether in response to ALBERT EINSTEIN’s Spe-
cial Theory of Relativity). See also MATERIALISM.
Ocoee
Odense
to the SUPEREGO.
Oehlenschläger
ogham
oil-drop experiment See MILLIKAN OIL-DROP EXPERIMENT
husband’s death in 1946. She is regarded by critics as one of the most
original and important American artists, and her works are highly popu-
lar among the general public.
Okefenokee
Olaf V Norwegian in full Olav Alexander Edward Christian
Frederik (b. July 2, 1903, Apple-
ton House, near Sandringham, Nor-
folk, Eng.—d. Jan. 17, 1991, Oslo,
Nor.) King of Norway (1957–91).
Son of King HAAKON VII, Olaf
became a celebrated sportsman, win-
ning the gold medal in yachting at
the 1928 Olympics. In World War II
he lived in exile with his family in
England and was named head of the
Norwegian armed forces in 1944.
From 1955 he served as regent for
his father, whom he succeeded as
king in 1957. Like other constitu-
tional monarchs, Olaf’s duties were
largely ceremonial.
Olajuwon
jaw, a nonprehensile tail (if any), and hard patches of bare skin (ischial
callosities) on the buttocks. Zoologists gather all Old World monkeys into
a single family, Cercopithecidae. There are two subfamilies: Cercopith-
ecinae, or monkeys with cheek pouches (MACAQUES, BABOONS, VERVETS, MAN-
DRILLS, and others); and Colobinae, or leaf monkeys (langurs, COLOBUS
MONKEYS, PROBOSCIS MONKEYS, and others). See also NEW WORLD MONKEY.
Oldenbarnevelt
Olivetti & C. SpA
ING, CANOEING, CYCLING, DIVING, equestrian sports, FENCING, FIELD HOCKEY, FOOT-
BALL (soccer), GYMNASTICS, HANDBALL, JUDO, the modern PENTATHLON, ROWING,
SAILING, SHOOTING, SOFTBALL, SWIMMING, TABLE TENNIS, TENNIS, TRACK AND FIELD (ath-
letics), the TRIATHLON, VOLLEYBALL, WATER POLO, WEIGHTLIFTING, and WRESTLING. The
HOCKEY, LUGEING, SKELETON SLEDDING, SNOWBOARDING, and numerous ice SKAT-
program for the Winter Games includes the BIATHLON, BOBSLEDDING,
Olynthus
deposed by his son, who began a policy of modernization, and under him
Oman joined the ARAB LEAGUE and the UNITED NATIONS. In the First PERSIAN
GULF WAR, Oman cooperated with the forces allied against Iraq. It subse-
quently continued to expand its foreign relations.
Oman, Gulf of Northwestern arm of the Arabian Sea, between the
eastern part of the ARABIAN PENINSULA and Iran. It is about 230 mi (370 km)
wide and 340 mi (545 km) long and connects with the PERSIAN GULF through
the Strait of HORMUZ. It is the only entrance to the Persian Gulf from the
Arabian Sea and Indian Ocean and is important as a shipping route for
the oil-producing area around the Persian Gulf.
Omar, Mosque of See DOME OF THE ROCK
Omar Khayyam
Onega
souls, bodies, or God, claiming that ontology could be a deductive dis-
cipline revealing the essences of things. This view was later strongly
criticized by DAVID HUME and IMMANUEL KANT. Ontology was revived in the
early 20th century by practitioners of PHENOMENOLOGY and EXISTENTIALISM,
notably EDMUND HUSSERL and his student MARTIN HEIDEGGER. In the English-
speaking world, interest in ontology was renewed in the mid-20th century
by W.V.O. QUINE; by the end of the century it had become a central dis-
cipline of ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY. See also IDEALISM; REALISM; UNIVERSAL.
onychophoran
posers such as ALBAN BERG, BENJAMIN BRITTEN, GIAN CARLO MENOTTI, JOHN
ADAMS, and PHILIP GLASS—continued to be produced to critical acclaim.
Opera entered the 21st century as a vibrant and global art form. See also
BALLAD OPERA; OPERETTA.
operon
optical character recognition See OCR
optical scanner See optical SCANNER
optics Science concerned with the production and propagation of light,
the changes it undergoes and produces, and closely related phenomena.
Physical optics deals with the nature and properties of light; geometric
optics deals with the formation of images by mirrors, lenses, and other
devices that use light. Optical data processing involves manipulation of
the information content of an image formed by coherent (one-wavelength)
optical systems. The study of optics has led to the development of devices
such as EYEGLASSES and CONTACT LENSes, TELESCOPEs, MICROSCOPEs, CAMERAs, BIN-
Optimates and Populares
COMPANY; LIN ZEXU.
Oporto See PORTO
Oppenheimer, J(ulius) Rob-
orca See KILLER WHALE
Orcagna
based on INTEGRATION.
Ordovician
PEST MANAGEMENT techniques. Bioengineered strains are avoided. Since
organic farming is time-consuming, organically grown produce tends to
be expensive. Organic produce formerly accounted for a minuscule por-
tion of total American farm output, but it has seen a huge proportional
increase in sales in recent years.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Develop-
ment See Organization for ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
Organization of African Unity (OAU) See AFRICAN UNION
Organization of American States (OAS) International organiza-
tion formed in 1948 to replace the PAN-AMERICAN UNION. It promotes eco-
nomic, military, and cultural cooperation among its members, which
include almost all the independent states of the Western Hemisphere.
(Cuba’s membership was suspended in 1962.) The OAS’s main goals are
to maintain peace in the Western Hemisphere and to prevent intervention in
the region by any outside state. Since the end of the Cold War in the early
1990s, the OAS has more actively encouraged democratic government in
member states, in part by organizing missions to observe and monitor elec-
tions. See also ALLIANCE FOR PROGRESS; INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK.
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries See OPEC
organizational psychology See INDUSTRIAL PSYCHOLOGY
organizational relations See INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
organum
Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument National monument,
southwestern Arizona, U.S., at the Mexican border. It was established in
1937. With an area of 330,689 acres (133,929 hectares), it preserves seg-
ments of the mountainous SONORAN DESERT and is named for the organ-
pipe cactus. Wildlife includes GILA MONSTERs, antelope, coyotes, and a
variety of birds.
organic compound Substance whose MOLECULEs contain one or more
(often many more) CARBON ATOMs (excluding carbonates, cyanides, car-
bides, and a few others; see INORGANIC COMPOUND). Until 1828 (see UREA),
scientists believed that organic compounds could be formed only by life
processes (hence the name). Since carbon has a far greater tendency to
form molecular chains and rings than do other elements, its COMPOUNDs
are vastly more numerous (many millions have been described) than all
others known. Living organisms consist mostly of water and organic com-
pounds: PROTEINs, CARBOHYDRATEs, FATs, NUCLEIC ACIDs, HORMONEs, VITAMINs, and
ALCOHOLs, ALDEHYDEs, KETONEs, PHENOLs, ETHERs, ESTERs, and other, more com-
plex, molecules, including HETEROCYCLIC COMPOUNDs, ISOPRENOIDs, and AMINO
ACIDs.
organic farming or organic gardening System of CROP cultiva-
origami See PAPER FOLDING
Origen
Orléans, house of Name of the cadet or junior branch of the Valois
and BOURBON houses of France. Of the four dynasties of princes, Philippe
I (1336–75) died without an heir. Descendants of the second dynasty,
headed by Louis I (1372–1407), held the title until 1545. The third dynasty
was headed by Gaston (1608–60), whose title from 1626 passed to the
fourth dynasty under Philippe I (1640–1701), younger brother of LOUIS
XIV. Philippe’s descendants
included Louis-Philippe-Joseph, duke
d’ORLÉANS, and LOUIS-PHILIPPE, king of France from 1830 to 1848.
Orléans, Louis-Philippe-Joseph, duke d’ known as Philippe
Égalité (b. April 13, 1747, Saint-Cloud, France—d. Nov. 6, 1793, Paris)
French BOURBON prince who supported popular democracy in the FRENCH
REVOLUTION. A cousin of LOUIS XVI, he disapproved of MARIE-ANTOINETTE and
lived away from the royal court at Versailles. In 1787 he was exiled to
his estates for challenging the king’s authority. In 1789 he was elected to
the ESTATES GENERAL and soon joined the Third Estate. After joining the
JACOBIN CLUB (1791), he renounced his title of nobility (1792) and accepted
the name Philippe Égalité from the Paris Commune. In the NATIONAL CON-
VENTION, he supported the radicals, but, after his son LOUIS-PHILIPPE defected
to the Austrians, he was accused of conspiracy, arrested, and guillotined.
Orlov
pia, numbering more than 20 million, or nearly one-third of the popula-
tion, and occupying much of its central and south-central regions. They
speak a Cushitic language of the AFROASIATIC family. They are a diverse
group, having assimilated and intermarried with other peoples since the
16th century. Traditionally the Oromo were nomadic herders, but today
most are settled agriculturalists. Politically they are largely subjugated to
the dominant AMHARA. In religion they are divided among Islam, the Ethio-
pian Orthodox faith, and traditional beliefs.
Orontes
orthopedics
force the Seminole off their traditional lands in Florida and into the Indian
territory west of the Mississippi River. Osceola and his followers
employed guerrilla tactics and forced a truce. During negotiations he was
arrested and removed to a military fort at Charleston, S.C., where he died.
oscillator Mechanical or electronic device that produces a back-and-
forth PERIODIC MOTION. A PENDULUM is a simple mechanical oscillator that
swings with a constant amplitude, requiring the addition of energy at each
swing only to compensate for the energy lost because of air resistance or
friction. In electronic oscillators, ELECTRONS oscillate with a constant period
and also require the addition of energy to replace energy loss. Electronic
oscillators are used to generate ALTERNATING CURRENT and high-frequency
currents for carrier waves in radio broadcasting. They are incorporated in
a wide variety of electronic equipment.
oscilloscope
Ostend
otitis
TURKS.
Ottonian
(1–2 m), and weight is 6.5–60 lb
(3–26 kg); the large SEA OTTER is an
exception. Otter fur—e.g.,
that of
North American river otters—is
highly valued. Most species live near
rivers,
some live near
lakes or
streams, and the sea otter is com-
pletely marine. Otters eat
small
aquatic animals. They are inquisitive
and playful; a favourite sport is slid-
ing down mud or snow banks.
Otto I known as Otto the Great
INTERNAL-COMBUSTION
Ovett
owlet moth See MILLER
ox Domesticated form of large BOVID (species Bos taurus) that once
moved in herds across North America and Europe (where they have dis-
appeared) and Asia and Africa (where some still exist in the wild). The
docile castrated male is used as a draft animal in many countries. Oxen
are used for food in some areas. The term is also applied to a castrated
male of any CATTLE breed. See also AUROCHS, YAK.
oxalic
agents include FLUORINE, OZONE, and oxygen itself; strong reducing agents
include ALKALI METALs such as SODIUM and LITHIUM.
all rock types, whether IGNEOUS, SEDIMENTAR Y, or METAMORPHIC.
Oxus River See AMU DAR YA
other molecules and FUNCTIONAL GROUPs, including NITRATE, SULFATE, PHOSPHATE,
and CARBONATE; ALCOHOLs, ALDEHYDEs, CARBOXYLIC ACIDs, and KETONEs; and PER-
Oxyrhynchus
living things. CHLOROFLUOROCARBONS, or CFCs, and some other air pollut-
ants that diffuse into the ozone layer destroy ozone. In the mid-1980s,
scientists discovered that a “hole”—an area where the ozone is up to 50%
thinner than normal—develops periodically in the ozone layer above Ant-
arctica. This severe regional depletion, explained as a natural seasonal
depletion, appears to have been exacerbated by the effects of CFCs, and
may have led to an increase in SKIN CANCER caused by UV exposure.
Restrictions on the manufacture and use of CFCs and other ozone-
destroying pollutants were imposed in 1978.
Paasikivi
and pagodas cover a wide area. An earthquake in 1975 severely damaged
more than half of the important structures and irreparably destroyed many
of them. The village also has a school for lacquerware, for which the
region is noted.
Paganini
Päijänne
(e.g., MURAL, easel, panel, MINIATURE, ILLUMINATED MANUSCRIPT, SCROLL, screen,
Paisiello
Pala bronze See EASTERN INDIAN BRONZE
palace Royal residence, and sometimes a seat of government or a reli-
gious centre. The word derives from Rome’s Palatine Hill, where the
emperors built their residences. The earliest known palaces are those of
the Egyptian kings at Thebes, with an outer wall enclosing a labyrinth of
rooms and courtyards. Other ancient cultures also built vast palaces (e.g.,
the Assyrian palaces at NimrHd, Khorsabad, and Nineveh; the Minoan
palace at Knossos; and the Persian palaces at Persepolis and Susa). In
Rome and Constantinople, palaces reached their peak as centres of power.
In Western Europe after the Middle Ages, palaces tended to be single
buildings. In Renaissance Italy every prince had his royal palace, usually
with an internal court surrounded by an arcade. The court of the Pitti Pal-
ace in Florence (1560) is an important example of Mannerist architecture.
French palaces include the LOUVRE and VERSAILLES; Spanish palaces include
EL ESCORIAL and the ALHAMBRA. In contrast to the typical Western format,
East Asian palaces, such as the imperial palaces of Japan and those in
Beijing’s FORBIDDEN CITY, consist of many buildings (in these cases, low
pavilions mostly of highly decorated wood construction) within vast
walled gardens.
Palacký
nant during the Cretaceous had disappeared, and the epoch saw the rapid
proliferation and evolution of mammals.
extended climatic conditions of past geologic ages. Paleoclimatologists
seek to explain climate variations for all parts of the Earth during any
given geologic period, beginning with the time of the Earth’s formation.
The basic research data are drawn mainly from geology and paleobotany;
speculative attempts at explanation have come largely from astronomy,
atmospheric physics, meteorology, and geophysics.
paleogeography or palaeogeography Geography of selected
Paleolithic
EDWARD R. MURROW.
Palma, Arturo Alessandri See Arturo ALESSANDRI PALMA
Palmas, Las See LAS PALMAS
Palme
m) in elevation, as well as many glaciers. Its highest point, IMENI ISMAIL
SAMANI (Communism) Peak, rises in the northwestern part of the range to
an elevation of 24,590 ft (7,495 m). The region is sparsely populated, and
almost all the inhabitants are Tajiks. It is a central mountain knot from
which extend several great ranges, including the KARAKORAMs and HINDU
KUSH.
Pamlico
Pan-Slavism Movement to unite Slav peoples of eastern and central
Europe. It began in the early 19th century when Slav intellectuals stud-
ied their common cultures. Political goals for Slavic unity increased in
1848, when a Slav congress organized by FRANTIŠEK PALACKý met in Prague
to press for equal rights under Austrian rule. In the 1860s the movement
became popular in Russia, to which Pan-Slavs looked for protection from
Turkish and Austro-Hungarian rule; this led Russia and Serbia into wars
against the Ottoman Empire in 1876–77. In the 20th century, nationalist
rivalries among the Slav peoples prevented their effective collaboration.
Pan-Turkism Political movement of the late 19th and early 20th cen-
turies, which had as its goal the political union of all Turkic-speaking
peoples in the OTTOMAN EMPIRE, Russia, China, Iran, and Afghanistan. The
movement, which began among the Turks in the Crimea and on the Volga,
initially sought to unite the Turks of the Ottoman and Russian empires
against growing Russian domination. MUSTAFA KEMAL ATATÜRK, the father of
the Republic of Turkey, later de-emphasized Pan-Turkism, encouraging
Turkish nationalism only within Turkey. See also Ismail GASPRINSKI; ENVER
PASHA; YOUNG TURKS.
Panaji
anteed representation in proportion to their population. Today the role and
success of the panchayats are still the topic of heated discussion. See also
INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS.
Panchen Lama
women’s-suffrage bill and the Married Women’s Property Acts (1870,
1882). In 1889 she founded the Women’s Franchise League, which in
1894 secured for married women the right to vote in local elections. In
1903, after holding municipal offices in Manchester, she founded the
Women’s Social and Political Union (WSPU). From 1912 she advocated
extreme militancy, mainly in the form of arson, and was arrested 12 times
in one year. Weeks before her death in 1928, Britain passed a bill to give
voting rights to all women. Her daughter Christabel H. Pankhurst (1880–
1958)—later Dame Christabel—organized the militant
tactics of the
WSPU and directed actions that included hunger strikes and huge out-
door rallies. She later became a religious evangelist and moved to the U.S.
Pannini
Paoli
papillomavirus
VON HINDENBURG to
MACHINE; KRAFT PROCESS.
Papuan
Paraguay
Paramaribo
Paris Commune or Commune of Paris (March 18–May 28, 1871)
Paris-Match
Parks, Rosa orig. Rosa Louise McCauley (b. Feb. 4, 1913, Tuske-
gee, Ala., U.S.—d. Oct. 24, 2005, Detroit, Mich.) U.S. civil rights activ-
ist. She worked as a seamstress in Montgomery, Ala., where she joined
the NAACP in 1943. In 1955 she was arrested after refusing to give her
seat on a public bus to a white man. The resultant boycott of the city’s
bus system, organized by MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR., and others, brought the
CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT to new prominence. In 1957 Parks moved to Detroit,
where she was a staff assistant (1965–88) to U.S. Rep. John Conyers. She
was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in 1999.
Parlement
Parker, Dorothy orig. Dorothy
Parkinson, C(yril) Northcote
parliamentary procedure or rules of order Generally accepted
Parmenides
Parshvanatha
tions from a Highway Railing at Barstow, California (1941), US High-
ball (1943), and And on the Seventh Day Petals Fell on Petaluma (1966).
parterre
prepregnancy state. See also CESAREAN SECTION; LACTATION; MIDWIFER Y; MISCAR-
RIAGE; NATURAL CHILDBIRTH; OBSTETRICS AND GYNECOLOGY; PREMATURE BIRTH.
Party of God See HEZBOLLAH
Parvati
Pashtun
Pasternak, Boris (Leonidovich) (b. Feb. 10, 1890, Moscow,
Pasteur
ines attacked SIMONY and clerical concubinage and marriage and opposed
the clergy’s moral corruption. They also encouraged greater participation
by the laity in religious life and drew support from the Gregorian Reform
popes, including Alexander II and GREGOR Y VII. The Patarines formed part
of the broader movement for church reform in the 11th century, and the
resignation of their rival, the archbishop of Milan, led to a schism in the
city that would help bring about the INVESTITURE CONTROVERSY. In the later
12th century, the name Patarine was used as a general label for all her-
etics, particularly the CATHARI.
patch test Controlled application of biological or chemical substances
to the skin to test for ALLERGY. Small amounts of diluted test substances
applied under a patch of cloth or soft paper and an impermeable mem-
brane are left in place for 48 hours, and the skin reaction is then exam-
ined and scored from 0 (none) to 4+ (severe blistering and redness).
Patel
Patna
Paulus
Paul VI orig. Giovanni Battista Montini (b. Sept. 26, 1897, Con-
PAULI EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE.
Pavese
Pazzi conspiracy
1462 I
Peacock (cid:2) Pearson
Pear (Pyrus communis)
GRANT HEILMAN
COURTESY OF THE AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL
HISTORY, NEW YORK
Blister pearl attached to the shell of an
Oriental pearl oyster (Pinctada marten-
sii Dunker)
pearlstone See PERLITE
viewed was NIKITA KHRUSHCHEV. See MUCKRAKER.
Pearson, Lester B(owles) (b. April 23, 1897, Toronto, Ont.,
Can.—d. Dec. 27, 1972, Ottawa, Ont.) Prime minister of Canada (1963–
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
peat moss or sphagnum moss
Peary, Harold orig. Harrold Jese Pereira de Faria (b. July 25,
economic regimens. See also EJIDO; FEUDALISM; HACIENDA; SERFDOM.
Peasants’ Revolt or Wat Tyler’s Rebellion (1381) First great
DR YCH ZWINGLI and THOMAS MÜNTZER, its condemnation by MARTIN LUTHER
Peckinpah
Pegasus
Penang
DULUM).
peneplain
Penobscot
Penutian languages
diet were blamed until Helicobacter pylori bacteria and long-term use of
ASPIRIN and similar drugs were shown to be the two major causes. The
former is treated with combination drug therapy and the latter by stop-
ping the causative drugs if possible or with drugs that reduce acid pro-
duction. A rare cause is Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, in which a tumour
causes increased acid secretion. Cigarette smoking slows healing and pro-
motes recurrence.
peptide Organic compound composed of a series of AMINO ACIDs linked
by peptide bonds (see COVALENT BOND) between a carbon atom of one and
a nitrogen atom of the next. Peptide chains longer than a few dozen amino
acids are called PROTEINs. Biosynthesis of peptides from a succession of
amino acids carried by transfer RNA molecules takes place on RIBOSOMEs
and is catalyzed and controlled by ENZYMEs. Many HORMONEs, ANTIBIOTICs,
and other compounds that participate in life processes are peptides.
Pepys
peregrine falcon
activities, including happenings, body art, actions, events, and non-matrix
theatre. Prominent performance artists have included JOSEPH BEUYS, JOHN
CAGE, Dennis Oppenheim, Yoko Ono, NAM JUNE PAIK, MEREDITH MONK, and
LAURIE ANDERSON.
Pergamum
periodontitis
permutations and combinations Number of ways a subset of
Pernambuco See RECIFE
Perón
Perrault
GULF WAR.
Persian language or Farsi language IRANIAN LANGUAGE spoken by
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Persia (cid:2) personalismo
Persian Wars or Greco-Persian Wars (492–449 BC) Series of
American persimmon (Diospyros vir-
giniana).
H.R. HUNGERFORD
Perski, Shimon See SHIMON PERES
personal computer (PC) MICROCOMPUTER designed for use by one
person at a time. A typical PC assemblage comprises a CPU; internal
MEMOR Y consisting of RAM and ROM; data storage devices (including a
HARD DISC, a FLOPPY DISC, orCD-ROM); and input/output devices (including
a display screen, keyboard, MOUSE, and PRINTER). The PC industry began in
1977 when APPLE COMPUTER introduced the Apple II. Radio Shack and
Commodore Business Machines also introduced PCs that year.
entered the PC market in 1981. The IBM PC, with increased memory
capacity and backed by IBM’s large sales organization, quickly became
the industry standard. Apple’s Macintosh (1984) was particularly useful
for DESKTOP PUBLISHING. MICROSOFT CORP. introduced MS WINDOWS (1985), a
personal property See REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY
1478 I personality (cid:2) Peru
experience. See also PERSONALITY DISORDER; PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING.
personnel administration See INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
Perspex See LUCITE
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Perth City (pop., 1995 est.: 42,000), central Scotland. Located on the
River TAY, northwest of EDINBURGH, Perth was a Roman settlement; it
became a royal burgh in 1210. It was the capital of Scotland until 1437,
when King JAMES I of Scotland was murdered there. At the Church of St.
John the Baptist in 1559, JOHN KNOX denounced idolatry; the result was
the plunder of Perth’s monasteries and altars. It was a JACOBITE city dur-
ing the Scottish uprisings of 1715 and 1745. The economy is based on
whisky blending and distilling and on manufacturing. It is also an agri-
cultural market centre.
pertussis See WHOOPING COUGH
nearly one-third are MESTIZOs, and most of
the remainder are Aymara Indians and
people of European ancestry. Languages:
Spanish, Quechua, Aymara (all official).
Religion: Christianity
(predominantly
Roman Catholic [official]; also Protestant). Currency: new sol. Peru is the
third largest country in South America and may be divided into three geo-
graphic regions from west to east: the coast, which consists of a long,
narrow belt of desert lowlands; the Sierra (highlands), which is the Peru-
vian portion of the ANDES MOUNTAINS; and the Montaña, the vast, forested
eastern foothills and plains, consisting mainly of the tropical rainforests
of the AMAZON RIVER basin. Peru has a developing mixed economy based
largely on services, manufacturing, agriculture, and mining. Most indus-
tries, including the petroleum industry, were nationalized in the late 1960s
and early ’70s, but many were privatized again in the 1990s. Peru is a
republic with one legislative house; its head of state and government is
the president. Peru was the centre of the INCA empire, whose capital,
CUZCO, was established in the 12th century. In 1533 the region was con-
quered by Spanish adventurer FRANCISCO PIZARRO and thereafter was domi-
nated by Spain for almost 300 years as the Viceroyalty of PERU. It declared
its independence in 1821, and freedom was achieved in 1824. Peru was
defeated by Chile in the War of the PACIFIC (1879–83). In 1941 a bound-
ary dispute with Ecuador erupted into war, which gave Peru control over
a larger part of the Amazon basin; further disputes ensued until the bor-
der was demarcated again in 1998. The government was overthrown by
a military junta in 1968; civilian rule was restored in 1980. The govern-
ment of ALBERTO FUJIMORI dissolved the legislature in 1992 and promulgated
a new constitution the following year. The government later successfully
combated the SHINING PATH and TUPAC AMARÚ rebel movements. Fujimori
won a second term in 1995, but charges of fraud accompanied his elec-
Perugia
Some inadvertently affect other organisms in the environment, either
directly by their toxic effects or via elimination of the target organism.
pet Any animal kept by humans for companionship or pleasure rather
than for utility. The main distinction between pets and domesticated live-
stock is the degree of contact between owner and animal. Another dis-
tinction is the owner’s affection for the animal, which is often returned.
Dogs are known to have been kept as pets since prehistoric times; cats,
since the 16th century BC; and horses, since at least 2000 BC. Other com-
mon pets include birds, rabbits, rodents, raccoons, reptiles, amphibians,
and even insects. The trend toward making pets of exotic animals (e.g.,
monkeys and ocelots) is worrisome because owners can rarely provide
for their needs, and the animals’ already precarious populations are fur-
ther depleted when members are sold for pets.
PET See POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY
Pétain
Petipa
Peter the Cruel See PETER IV
Petition of Right (1628) Petition sent by Parliament to King CHARLES I
complaining of a series of breaches of law. The petition sought recognition
of four principles: no taxation without the consent of Parliament, no impris-
onment without cause, no quartering of soldiers on subjects, and no martial
law in peacetime. To continue receiving subsidies for his policies, Charles
was compelled to accept the petition, but he later ignored its principles.
Pet¤fi
petrol See GASOLINE
Petróleos de Venezuela
peyotism See NATIVE AMERICAN CHURCH
ELECTROCHEMISTR Y).
Phaedra
and purity. See also DRUG POISONING; PHARMACY; PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTR Y.
pharmacy Science dealing with collection, preparation, and standard-
ization of DRUGs. Pharmacists, who must earn a qualifying degree, prepare
and dispense prescribed medications. They formerly mixed and measured
drug products from raw materials according to doctors’ prescriptions, and
they are still responsible for formulating, storing, and providing correct
dosages of medicines, now usually produced by pharmaceutical compa-
nies as premeasured tablets or capsules. They also advise patients on the
use of both prescription and over-the-counter drugs. Laws regulating the
pharmaceutical industry are based on the national pharmacopoeia, which
outlines the purity and dosages of numerous medicinal products.
Pharsalus
phenylalanine out of the diet (by total avoidance of meat, dairy, and high-
protein foods and ASPARTAME) until adolescence permits normal develop-
ment. Protein is supplied in a phenylalanine-free formula. Pregnant
women with PKU must resume the diet to prevent severe damage to the
unborn child.
pheromone
Philip II French Philippe known as Philip the Bold (b. Jan. 17,
1342, Pontoise, France—d. April 27, 1404, Halle, Brabant) Duke of Bur-
gundy (1363–1404). He was granted the duchy of Burgundy by his father,
JOHN II, and by marriage and purchase he acquired additional lands in
northern and central France, Flanders, and the Netherlands. He shared the
government with his brothers during the minority of his nephew CHARLES
VI, ensuring friendly relations with England and Germany. When Charles
went insane (1392), Philip became virtual ruler of France. He formed an
alliance with England (1396) and withdrew his support of the AVIGNON
PAPACY (1398).
Philip II French Philippe known as Philip Augustus (b. Aug. 21,
Philip II Spanish Felipe
(1346) caused crises in France until the spread of the BLACK DEATH (from
1348) overshadowed other considerations.
Philip, duke of Edinburgh known as Prince Philip (b. June 10,
1921, Corfu, Greece) Husband of Queen ELIZABETH II of Britain. Son of
Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark (1882–1944) and Princess Alice
(1885–1969), a great-granddaughter of Queen VICTORIA, he was reared in
Britain. In World War II he served in combat with the Royal Navy. In
1947 he became a British subject, taking his mother’s surname, Mount-
batten, and renouncing his right to the Greek and Danish thrones. He
married Princess Elizabeth in 1947 and continued on active service in the
navy until her accession to the throne in 1952. CHARLES, PRINCE OF WALES,
is their son.
Philip, King See METACOM
Philip Augustus See PHILIP II (France)
Philip Morris tobacco companies Two of the world’s largest
Philip of Macedonia See PHILIP II
Philip of Valois See PHILIP VI (France)
Philip the Bold See PHILIP II (Burgundy)
Philip the Fair See PHILIP IV (France)
Philip the Good See PHILIP III (Burgundy)
Philipon
Philo Judaeus
Philips Electronics NV in full Royal Philips Electronics NV
Dutch Koninklijke Philips Electronics NV Major Dutch manufac-
Phillips, Wendell (b. Nov. 29,
philosophers such as THOMAS AQUINAS, GEORGE BERKELEY, and SØREN KIERKEG-
AARD regarded philosophy as a means of defending religion and dispelling
the antireligious errors of MATERIALISM and RATIONALISM. PYTHAGORAS, RENÉ
SOCRATICS, FRANCIS BACON, and ALFRED NORTH WHITEHEAD, among many oth-
METAPHYSICS, philosophy of MIND, and PHILOSOPHICAL ANTHROPOLOGY. See also
ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY; CONTINENTAL PHILOSOPHY; FEMINIST PHILOSOPHY; philosophy
of SCIENCE.
phlebitis
phonics
Photius
range from about 18,000 °F (10,000
°C) at the bottom to 8,000 °F (4,000
°C) at the top; its density is about
1/1,000 that of air at the surface of
Earth. SUNSPOTs are photospheric
phenomena. The photosphere has a
granular structure. Each grain (cell),
a mass of hot gas several hundred
miles in diameter, rises from inside
the Sun, radiates energy, and sinks
back within minutes to be replaced
by others in a constantly changing
pattern.
photosynthesis
Process
which green plants and certain other
organisms
transform light
chemical energy. In green plants,
light energy is captured by CHLORO-
PHYLL in the CHLOROPLASTS of the leaves
and used to convert water, carbon
dioxide, and minerals into oxygen
and energy-rich organic compounds
(simple and complex sugars) that are
the basis of both plant and animal
life. Photosynthesis consists of a
number of photochemical and enzy-
matic reactions. It occurs in two
stages. During the light-dependent
stage (light reaction), chlorophyll
absorbs light energy, which excites
some electrons in the pigment mol-
ecules to higher energy levels; these
leave the chlorophyll and pass along
a series of molecules, generating for-
mation of NADPH (an enzyme) and
high-energy ATP molecules. Oxy-
gen, released as a by-product, passes
into the atmosphere through pores in
the leaves. NADPH and ATP drive
the second stage, the dark reaction
(or Calvin cycle, discovered by
MELVIN CALVIN), which does not require light. During this stage glucose is
generated using atmospheric carbon dioxide. Photosynthesis is crucial for
maintaining life on Earth; if it ceased, there would soon be little food or
other organic matter on the planet, and most types of organisms would
disappear.
phototube See PHOTOCELL
photovoltaic effect Process in which two dissimilar materials in close
contact act as an electric cell when struck by light or other radiant energy.
In CR YSTALS of certain elements, such as SILICON and GERMANIUM, the ELECTRONS
are usually not free to move from atom to atom. Light striking the crys-
tal provides the energy needed to free electrons from their bound condi-
tion. These electrons can cross the junction between two dissimilar
crystals more easily in one direction than another, so one side of the junc-
tion acquires a negative voltage with respect to the other. As long as light
falls on the two materials, the photovoltaic BATTER Y can continue to pro-
vide voltage and current. The current can be used to measure the bright-
ness of the light or as a source of power, as in a SOLAR CELL.
Phrachomklao See MONGKUT
Phrachunlachomklao See CHULALONGKORN
Phramongkutklao See VAJIRAVUDH
phratry
phrenology
physics, philosophy of Philosophical investigation of the concepts,
problems, and methods of PHYSICS and related sciences. The philosophy of
physics traditionally has been concerned with clarifying the logical struc-
ture, ontological commitments, and intertheoretic relations of fundamen-
tal physical theories, including RELATIVITY, QUANTUM MECHANICS, and STATISTICAL
CIPLE; UNIFIED FIELD THEOR Y.
VATION, EMOTION, LEARNING, MEMOR Y, COGNITION, or MENTAL DISORDERs. Also con-
sidered are other physical factors that affect the nervous system, including
heredity, metabolism, hormones, disease, drug ingestion, and diet. An
experimental science, physiological psychology relies heavily on labora-
tory research and quantitative data.
physiology
Piazzolla
the last campaign of the THIRTY YEARS’ WAR. He represented Austria at the
Congress of Nürnberg (1649), which negotiated issues left unsettled by
the Peace of WESTPHALIA.
picker Machine for harvesting a crop (e.g., corn, cotton) and preparing
it for storage. The mechanical picker removes mainly the desired portion
of the plant (e.g., grain and cobs of corn, bolls of cotton) rather than har-
vesting the entire plant.
pickerel Any of several North American PIKES (family Esocidae), dis-
tinguished from the northern pike and MUSKELLUNGE by their smaller size,
completely scaled cheeks and gill covers, and banded or chainlike mark-
ings. The chain pickerel (Esox niger) grows to about 2 ft (0.6 m) and a
weight of about 3 lbs (1.4 kg). The barred (E. americanus) and grass (E.
vermiculatus) pickerels reach a maximum weight of about 1 lb (0.5 kg).
Pickering, Timothy (b. July 17, 1745, Salem, Mass.—d. Jan. 29,
1829, Salem, Mass., U.S.) U.S. politician. He joined the militia in 1766
and served in the AMERICAN REVOLUTION under GEORGE WASHINGTON, becom-
ing adjutant general (1777–78) and quartermaster general (1780–85). He
later served as U.S. postmaster general (1791–95), secretary of war
(1795), and secretary of state (1795–1800). He served in the U.S. Senate
from 1803 to 1811 and in the House of Representatives from 1813 to 1817.
A leader of the FEDERALIST PARTY, he was a member of the ESSEX JUNTO, and
he opposed the WAR OF 1812. After retiring from politics, he turned to
experimental farming and education.
picketing Act by workers of standing in front of or near a workplace
to call attention to their grievances, discourage patronage, and, during
STRIKES, to discourage strikebreakers. Picketing is also used in non-work-
related protests. The U.S. Norris-LaGuardia Act (1932) made it easier for
workers to picket by restricting the use of court injunctions against strikes,
but the TAFT-HARTLEY ACT (1947) outlawed mass picketing.
Pickett, George E(dward) (b. Jan. 25, 1825, Richmond, Va.,
U.S.—d. July 30, 1875, Norfolk, Va.) U.S. and Confederate army officer.
He graduated from West Point and served in the MEXICAN WAR. In 1861
he resigned his commission to enter the Confederate army. He rose to
major general and commanded a division at the Battle of Fredericksburg.
At the Battle of GETTYSBURG, he led the climactic attack known as Pickett’s
Charge, in which 4,300 men of his division constituted almost half the
attacking force under JAMES LONGSTREET. The attempt to breach the Union
lines on Cemetery Ridge was repulsed with the loss of about 60% of his
men. Though criticized for his leadership, he retained his command.
Pickford, Mary orig. Gladys Mary Smith (b. April 9, 1893, Tor-
Pico Bolívar See BOLÍVAR PEAK
Pico della Mirandola
infamous convict, Alexander Pierce (Jimmy the Pieman), who was recap-
tured at its mouth after escaping from the MACQUARIE HARBOUR penal colony.
pier In building construction, a vertical load-bearing member such as an
intermediate support for adjacent ends of two BAYS or spans. Bulkier than
a column but smaller than a wall, a pier can support an arch or beam. The
lower portion of a pier may be widened to better distribute the downward
pressure of a massive overlying structure. In Romanesque and Gothic
architecture, a feature of the NAVE arcade is the compound pier, which is
cross-shaped in cross section, with shafts placed in the recesses.
Pierce, Franklin (b. Nov. 23, 1804, Hillsboro, N.H., U.S.—d. Oct. 8,
1869, Concord, N.H.) 14th president
of the U.S. (1853–57). He served in
the U.S. House of Representatives
from 1833 to 1837 and in the Senate
from 1837 to 1842. At
the dead-
locked Democratic Party convention
of 1852, he was nominated as a com-
promise
presidential
candidate;
though largely unknown nationally,
he unexpectedly trounced WINFIELD
SCOTT in the general election. For the
sake of harmony and business pros-
perity, he was inclined to oppose
antislavery agitation. His promotion
of U.S. territorial expansion resulted
in the diplomatic controversy of the
OSTEND MANIFESTO. He reorganized
the diplomatic and consular service
and created the U.S. Court of
Claims. Pierce encouraged plans for
a transcontinental railroad and approved the GADSDEN PURCHASE. To pro-
mote northwestern migration and conciliate sectional demands, he
approved the KANSAS-NEBRASKA ACT but was unable to settle the resultant
problems. Defeated for renomination by JAMES BUCHANAN in 1856, he
retired from politics.
Piero della Francesca
various iron and STEEL products (see BESSEMER PROCESS, FINER Y PROCESS, PUD-
DLING PROCESS).
Pigalle
Pilon
GRAN CHACO of Paraguay to join the Paraguay River opposite ASUNCIÓN,
after about 1,000 mi (1,600 km). It forms part of the border between
Argentina and Paraguay.
pile In building construction, a postlike foundation member used from
prehistoric times. Piles transfer building loads down to a suitable bearing
stratum when the soil mass immediately below a construction is unsuitable
for the direct bearing of footings (see FOUNDATION). Piles support loads
either by bearing directly on rock or suitable soil or by developing friction
along their very ample length. In modern civil engineering, piles of timber,
steel, or concrete are driven into the ground to support a structure; bridge
piers and building foundations may be supported on groups of piles.
pile See HEMORRHOID
MAYFLOWER COMPACT; PLYMOUTH CO.
pill bug Any species of terrestrial CRUSTACEAN in the genera Armadilli-
dium and Armadillo (both in the
order Isopoda), native to Europe and
introduced worldwide. Pill bugs
(sometimes
called wood
lice)
resemble tiny armadillos in appear-
ance and behaviour;
they have a
gray, oval body covered with plate-
like armour and, when disturbed, roll
into a ball. They are about 0.75 in.
(19 mm) long. Pill bugs live in dry,
sunny places, in dry leaf litter, and on
forest edges. See also SOW BUG.
pillar Relatively slender isolated
vertical structural member such as a
PIER or (usually squat) column. It may
be constructed of a single piece of
stone or wood or built up of units,
such as bricks. A pillar commonly
has a load-bearing or stabilizing
function, but it may also stand alone,
as do commemorative pillars.
Pillars of Hercules Two prom-
ontories at the eastern end of the Strait of GIBRALTAR. They include the Rock
of Gibraltar (at GIBRALTAR) in Europe and Jebel Musa (at CEUTA) in north-
Pinatubo
Pinero
Piombo, Sebastiano del See SEBASTIANO DEL PIOMBO
Pirquet
pitot tube
pit bull terrier or Staffordshire terrier Dog breed developed in
HEAD, FER-DE-LANCE, MOCCASIN, RATTLESNAKE.
VAL; TUNING AND TEMPERAMENT.
with repressive measures. In 1800 he secured the Act of UNION with Ire-
land but resigned in 1801 when his proposal for Catholic emancipation
was denied. His second term as premier (1804–06) was marked by the
collapse of the Third Coalition after the Battles of ULM and AUSTERLITZ, the
news of which weakened his already fragile health.
pittosporum
PKK See KURDISTAN WORKERS PARTY
PKU See PHENYLKETONURIA
PL Kyodan
toward the tail. Most species are 0.1–0.6 in. (3–15 mm) long; some grow to
about 1 ft (30 cm). Planarians swim with an undulating motion or creep like
slugs. Most feed at night on protozoans, snails, and other worms.
Planck
Plantagenet
Plata, Viceroyalty of the Río de la See Viceroyalty of the RÍO DE
LA PLATA
Plataea
and take part in the conversion sequence of coagulation factors. They also
store and transport several chemicals.
Plateresque
Plautus
Pleven
KILLDEER.
WATER POLLUTION, WATER-SUPPLY SYSTEM. See illustration opposite.
Plutarch
TRANSITION ELEMENTs, it is the most important TRANSURANIUM ELEMENT because of
PMS See PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME
pneumatic device
Pocahontas
pogy See MENHADEN
Poincaré
Poitier
Polanski
poliomyelitis
political convention or party conference In politics, a meeting
LOCKE, and JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU in the exposition of a SOCIAL-CONTRACT
theory. This was rejected by DAVID HUME and also by G.W.F. HEGEL, whose
Philosophy of Right (1821) was fundamental for 19th-century political
thought. Hegel’s defense of private property stimulated KARL MAR X’s cri-
tique of it. JOHN STUART MILL developed JEREMY BENTHAM’s utilitarian theory
of law and political institutions, so as to reconcile them with individual
liberty. In the 20th century JOHN DEWEY sought to counteract the dehu-
manizing aspects of modern capitalist society through a freer form of
pollack or pollock
Pollaiuolo
warrior’s triumphal dance and had been adopted by the Polish court as a
formal march as early as 1573. The dancers promenaded with gliding steps
accented by bending the knee slightly on every third step. It often
appeared in ballets, and it was used as a musical form by composers such
as GEORGE FRIDERIC HANDEL, LUDWIG VAN BEETHOVEN, and especially FRÉDÉRIC
CHOPIN, whose piano polonaises were martial and heroic.
Poltava
include many PLASTICS, including POLYETHYLENE, the NYLONs, POLYURETHANEs,
POLYESTERs, vinyls (e.g., PVC), and synthetic RUBBERS. The SILICONE polymers,
with an inorganic backbone of silicon and oxygen atoms and organic side
groups, are among the most important mixed organic-inorganic com-
pounds.
polymerase
Pombal
Pompey
Pontormo
Popes and Antipopes1 (antipopes in italics) 
Peter
Linus
Anacletus
Clement I
Evaristus
Alexander I
Sixtus I
Telesphorus
Hyginus
Pius I
Anicetus
Soter
Eleutherius
Victor I
Zephyrinus
Calixtus I (Callistus)
Hippolytus
Urban I
Pontian
Anterus
Fabian
Cornelius
Novatian
Lucius I
Stephen I
Sixtus II
Dionysius
Felix I
Eutychian
Gaius
Marcellinus
Marcellus I
Eusebius
Miltiades (Melchiades)
Sylvester I
Julius I
Liberius
Felix (II)
Damasus I
Ursinus
Siricius
Anastasius I
Innocent I
Zosimus
Boniface I
Eulalius
Celestine I
Sixtus III
Leo I
Hilary
Simplicius
Felix III (or II)2
Gelasius I
Anastasius II
Symmachus
Laurentius
Hormisdas
John I
Felix IV (or III)2
Dioscorus
Boniface II
John II
Agapetus I
Silverius
Vigilius
Pelagius I
John III
Benedict I
Pelagius II
Gregory I
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
?–c.64
c.67–76/79
76–88 or
79–91
88–97 or
92–101
c.97–c.107
105–115 or
109–119
c.115–c.125
c.125–c.136
c.136–c.140
c.140–55
c.155–c.166
c.166–c.175
c.175–89
c.189–99
c.199–217
217?–22
217, 18–235
222–30
230–35
235–36
236–50
251–53
253–54
254–57
257–58
259–68
269–74
275–83
283–96
291/96–304
308–9
309/10
311–14
314–35
337–52
352–66
355–58
366–84
366–67
384–99
399–401
401–17
417–18
418–22
418–19
422–32
432–40
440–61
461–68
468–83
483–92
492–96
496–98
498–514
498, 501–c.
505/507
514–23
523–26
526–30
530–32
533–35
535–36
536–37
537–55
556–61
561–74
575–79
579–90
590–604
Sabinian
Boniface III
Boniface IV
Deusdedit (also called
Adeodatus I)
Boniface V
Honorius I
Severinus
John IV
Theodore I
Martin I
Eugenius I
Vitalian
Adeodatus II
Donus
Agatho
Leo II
Benedict II
John V
Conon
Sergius I
Theodore
Paschal
John VI
John VII
Sisinnius
Constantine
Gregory II
Gregory III
Zacharias (Zachary)
Stephen (II)3
Stephen II (or III) 3
Paul I
Constantine (II)
Philip
Stephen III (or IV) 3
Adrian I
Leo III
Stephen IV (or V) 3
Paschal I
Eugenius II
Valentine
Gregory IV
Sergius II
Leo IV
Benedict III
Anastasius (the Librarian)
Nicholas I
Adrian II
John VIII
Marinus I
Adrian III
Stephen V (or VI) 3
Formosus
Boniface VI
Stephen VI (or VII) 3
Romanus
Theodore II
John IX
Benedict IV
Leo V
Christopher
Sergius III
Anastasius III
Lando
John X
Leo VI
Stephen VII (or VIII) 3
John XI
Leo VII
Stephen VIII (or IX) 3
Marinus II
Agapetus II
John XII
604–6
608–15
615–18
619–25
625–38
640–42
642–49
649–55
654–57
657–72
672–76
676–78
678–81
682–83
684–85
685–86
686–87
687–701
701–5
705–7
708–15
715–31
731–41
741–52
752–57
757–67
767–68
768–72
772–95
795–816
816–17
817–24
824–27
827–44
844–47
847–55
855–58
858–67
867–72
872–82
882–84
884–85
885–91
891–96
898–900
900–903
903–4
904–11
911–13
913–14
914–28
929–31
931–35
936–39
939–42
942–46
946–55
955–64
Leo VIII4
Benedict V4
John XIII
Benedict VI
Boniface VII (1st time)
Benedict VII
John XIV
Boniface VII (2nd time)
John XV (or XVI)5
Gregory V
John XVI (or XVII) 5
Sylvester II
John XVII (or XVIII) 5
John XVIII (or XIX) 5
Sergius IV
Gregory (VI)
Benedict VIII
John XIX (or XX) 5
Benedict IX (1st time)
Sylvester III
Benedict IX (2nd time)
Gregory VI
Clement II
Benedict IX (3rd time)
Damasus II
Leo IX
Victor II
Stephen IX (or X) 3
Benedict X
Nicholas II
Alexander II
Honorius (II)
Gregory VII
Clement (III)
Victor III
Urban II
Paschal II
Theodoric
Albert (Aleric)
Sylvester (IV)
Gelasius II
Gregory (VIII)
Calixtus II (Callistus)
Honorius II
Celestine (II)
Innocent II
Anacletus (II)
Victor (IV)
Celestine II
Lucius II
Eugenius III
Anastasius IV
Adrian IV
Alexander III
Victor (IV)
Paschal (III)
Calixtus (III)
Innocent (III)
Lucius III
Urban III
Gregory VIII
Clement III
Celestine III
Innocent III
Honorius III
Gregory IX
Celestine IV
Innocent IV
Alexander IV
Urban IV
Clement IV
Gregory X
Innocent V
Adrian V
John XXI5
963–65
964–66?
965–72
973–74
974–83
983–84
984–85
985–96
996–99
997–98
999–1003
1004–9
1009–12
1012–24
1024–32
1032–44
1045–46
1046–47
1047–48
1049–54
1055–57
1057–58
1058–59
1059–61
1061–73
1061–72
1073–85
1080–1100
1086–87
1088–99
1099–1118
1100–2
1105–11
1118–19
1118–21
1119–24
1124–30
1130–43
1130–38
1143–44
1144–45
1145–53
1153–54
1154–59
1159–81
1159–64
1164–68
1168–78
1179–80
1181–85
1185–87
1187–91
1191–98
1198–1216
1216–27
1227–41
1243–54
1254–61
1261–64
1265–68
1271–76
1276–77
1277–80
1281–85
1285–87
1288–92
1294–1303
1303–4
1305–14
1316–34
1328–30
1334–42
1342–52
1352–62
1362–70
Nicholas III
Martin IV6
Honorius IV
Nicholas IV
Celestine V
Boniface VIII
Benedict XI
Clement V (at Avignon, 
from 1309)
John XXII 5 (at Avignon)
Nicholas (V) (at Rome)
Benedict XII (at Avignon)
Clement VI (at Avignon)
Innocent VI (at Avignon)
Urban V (at Avignon)
Gregory XI (at Avignon, 
then Rome from 1377)
1370–78
Urban VI
1378–89
Clement (VII) (at Avignon)
1378–94
Boniface IX
1389–1404
Benedict (XIII) (at Avignon)
1394–1423
Innocent VII
1404–6
Gregory XII
1406–15
Alexander (V) (at Bologna) 1409–10
John (XXIII) (at Bologna)
1410–15
Martin V6
1417–31
Clement (VIII)
1423–29
Eugenius IV
1431–47
Felix (V) (also called 
Amadeus VIII of Savoy)
Nicholas V
Calixtus III (Callistus)
Pius II
Paul II
Sixtus IV
Innocent VIII
Alexander VI
Pius III
Julius II
Leo X
Adrian VI
Clement VII
Paul III
Julius III
Marcellus II
Paul IV
Pius IV
Pius V
Gregory XIII
Sixtus V
Urban VII
Gregory XIV
Innocent IX
Clement VIII
Leo XI
Paul V
Gregory XV
Urban VIII
Innocent X
Alexander VII
Clement IX
Clement X
Innocent XI
Alexander VIII
Innocent XII
Clement XI
Innocent XIII
Benedict XIII
Clement XII
Benedict XIV
Clement XIII
Clement XIV
Pius VI
Pius VII
Leo XII
1439–49
1447–55
1455–58
1458–64
1464–71
1471–84
1484–92
1492–1503
1503–13
1513–21
1522–23
1523–34
1534–49
1550–55
1555–59
1559–65
1566–72
1572–85
1585–90
1590–91
1592–1605
1605–21
1621–23
1623–44
1644–55
1655–67
1667–69
1670–76
1676–89
1689–91
1691–1700
1700–21
1721–24
1724–30
1730–40
1740–58
1758–69
1769–74
1775–99
1800–23
1823–29
ASPENS, and BALSAM POPLARS.
poplar, yellow See TULIP TREE
Popocatépetl
bone china. See also BOW PORCELAIN; CHANTILLY PORCELAIN; CHELSEA PORCELAIN;
MEISSEN PORCELAIN; NYMPHENBURG PORCELAIN; SAINT-CLOUD PORCELAIN; SÈVRES
PORCELAIN; STONEWARE.
porgy
Popular Party (Italy) See ITALIAN POPULAR PARTY
Popular Republican Movement (MRP) French social reform
party. Founded in 1944, the MRP was a strong centre party of the FOURTH
REPUBLIC and the French expression of CHRISTIAN DEMOCRACY. After winning
about 25% of the vote, it declined in the 1950s, losing strength to both
right and left factions. In 1966 it was merged with other right-centre par-
ties to become the Centre Démocrate, which won only 13% of the vote.
By 1968 it had become little more than a political club.
popular sovereignty Political doctrine that allowed the settlers of
U.S. federal territories to decide whether to enter the Union as free or
slave states. It was applied by Sen. STEPHEN A. DOUGLAS as a means to reach
a compromise through passage of the KANSAS-NEBRASKA ACT. Critics of the
doctrine called it “squatter sovereignty.” The resulting violence between
pro- and antislavery factions (see BLEEDING KANSAS) showed its failure as a
workable compromise. See also DRED SCOTT DECISION.
Populares See OPTIMATES AND POPULARES
POPULIST MOVEMENT of the 1890s.
Populist See NARODNIK
Populist Movement Coalition of U.S. agrarian reformers in the Mid-
west and South in the 1890s. The movement developed from farmers’
alliances formed in the 1880s in reaction to falling crop prices and poor
credit facilities. The leaders organized the Populist, or People’s, Party
(1892), which advocated a variety of measures to help farmers. They also
demanded an increase in the circulating currency (to be achieved by the
porphyrin
Porto
in the AMERICAN CIVIL
Porter, Fitz-John (b. Aug. 31,
Portillo, José López See José LÓPEZ PORTILLO
WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.
of Portugal in Christian hands. In 1179 it became the kingdom of Portu-
gal and expanded as it reconquered the Muslim-held sectors. The bound-
aries of modern continental Portugal were completed under King AFONSO
III (reigned 1248–79). From 1580 to 1640 Portugal was united with Spain.
In the 15th and 16th centuries the monarchy encouraged exploration that
took Portuguese navigators to Africa, India, Indonesia, China, the Middle
East, and South America. Although Portugal established several colonies,
they achieved independence over the years (see BRAZIL; GOA; CAPE VERDE;
EAST TIMOR; ANGOLA; GUINEA-BISSAU; MOZAMBIQUE; MACAU). ANTÓNIO DE
OLIVEIRA SALAZAR ruled Portugal as a dictator from 1932 to 1968. The coun-
try’s dictatorship was overthrown in the April 25, 1974, Revolution of the
Carnations. A new constitution was adopted in 1976, and civilian rule
resumed. Portugal was a charter member of NATO and is a member of
the EUROPEAN UNION (EU). In 1999 the government adopted the euro as the
country’s official monetary unit and returned Macau, its last overseas ter-
ritory, to Chinese rule.
Portuguese East Africa See MOZAMBIQUE
Portuguese Guinea See GUINEA-BISSAU
Portuguese West Africa See ANGOLA
Poseidon
positron
nique of the antinovel and magic realism. Postmodernism has also led to a
proliferation of critical theories, most notably DECONSTRUCTION and its off-
shoots, and the breaking down of the distinction between “high” and “low”
culture.
postmortem See AUTOPSY
poststructuralism Movement
in LITERAR Y CRITICISM and philosophy
begun in France in the late 1960s. Drawing upon the linguistic theories
of FERDINAND DE SAUSSURE, the anthropology of CLAUDE LÉVI-STRAUSS (see STRUC-
TURALISM), and the deconstructionist theories of JACQUES DERRIDA (see DECON-
STRUCTION), it held that language is not a transparent medium that connects
one directly with a “truth” or “reality” outside it but rather a structure or
code, whose parts derive their meaning from their contrast with one
another and not from any connection with an outside world. Writers asso-
ciated with the movement include ROLAND BARTHES, JACQUES LACAN, JULIA
KRISTEVA, and MICHEL FOUCAULT.
Potala Palace
Potomac
Poussin
Powell, Robert Baden- See Robert S. BADEN-POWELL
Powhatan
Practical Learning School or Silhak School of thought that arose
Prado
progress toward real democracy. Although Dub:ek believed he could con-
trol the situation, the Soviet Union and the WARSAW PACT countries,
alarmed by the threat of a social-democratic Czechoslovakia, invaded the
country in August, deposed Dub:ek, and gradually restored control by
reinstalling hard-line communists as leaders.
Praia
Pratt Institute Private institution of higher learning in Brooklyn, New
York, New York, U.S. It was founded as a trade school in 1887 by the
industrialist Charles Pratt (1830–91). It comprises schools of architecture,
art and design (for which it is especially renowned), liberal arts and sci-
ences, professional studies, and information and library science. It has
both bachelor’s and master’s degree programs.
pratyaya
preeclampsia
premenstrual syndrome (PMS) Variable group of symptoms
occurring before MENSTRUATION in 40% of women, severe in about 10% of
those. Physical symptoms may include headache, cramps, bloating, and
constipation or diarrhea. Emotional symptoms range from irritability, leth-
argy, and mood swings to hostility, confusion, and depression. Theories as
to the cause centre on hormones, nutrition, and stress (known to affect
severity). Depending on the symptoms, treatment may involve exercise,
stress management, nutritional therapy, or drugs. Dietary measures include
low sodium and high protein and complex carbohydrate intake and avoid-
ance of xanthines (including caffeine). Increasing calcium intake has been
shown to prevent or reduce cramps, which are best treated with ibuprofen.
premier See PRIME MINISTER
Preminger
In the 17th century, preludes began to be frequently written for lute or
harpsichord. In later years the term came to be used for short piano pieces,
often in sets, by composers such as FRÉDÉRIC CHOPIN, ALEKSANDR SCRIABIN,
and CLAUDE DEBUSSY.
1544 I
Presbyterianism (cid:2) pressure gauge
games. See also ELEMENTAR Y EDUCATION.
Prescott, William H(ickling) (b. May 4, 1796, Salem, Mass.,
POSSESSION.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Prestes
Pride, Sir Thomas (b. Somer-
set?, Eng.—d. Oct.
1658,
Worcester House, Surrey) English
soldier. Joining the Parliamentary
army in the ENGLISH CIVIL WARS, he
commanded a regiment in the Battle
of NASEBY (1645), then served with
OLIVER CROMWELL and helped rout the
invading Scots at Preston (1648).
When the army, dominated by the
Independents, occupied London later
that year, Pride arrested or expelled
about 140 Presbyterian members
from the House
of Commons
(“Pride’s Purge”). He was a member
of the commission that tried King
CHARLES I.
Pridi Phanomyong
Primaticcio
Prince Rupert’s Land See RUPERT’S LAND
Prince William Sound Inlet of the Gulf of ALASKA, southern Alaska,
U.S. It lies east of the Kenai Peninsula and spans 90–100 mi (145–160
km). It was named by the British captain GEORGE VANCOUVER in 1778 to
honour a son of GEORGE III. In 1989 one of the most disastrous oil spills
in history occurred when the tanker Exxon Valdez ran aground on Bligh
Reef and lost 10.9 million gallons of crude oil into the sound.
princeps Latin “first one,” “leader” Unofficial title used by
Roman emperors from AUGUSTUS (r. 27 BC–AD 14) to DIOCLETIAN (r. 284–
305), a period called the principate. The title originated during the ROMAN
REPUBLIC, when it was held by the leading member of the Senate. Its use
by Augustus strengthened his claim to be the restorer of republican insti-
tutions and virtues, though he and his successors were in fact autocrats.
See also PRINCE.
Princeton, Battles of Trenton and See Battles of TRENTON AND PRIN-
CETON
Princeton University Private university in Princeton, New Jersey,
U.S., a traditional member of the IVY LEAGUE. Founded as the College of
New Jersey in 1746, it is the fourth oldest university in the U.S. and one
of the most prestigious. WOODROW WILSON served as university president
(1902–10). In addition to an undergraduate college and a graduate school,
Princeton has a school of engineering and applied science and a school
of architecture and urban planning. Its Woodrow Wilson School of Pub-
lic and International Affairs continues a long Princeton tradition of train-
ing government officials. The university has admitted women since 1969.
Princip
through the Pripet Marshes to Mazyr, then joins the DNIEPER RIVER in the
Kiev Reservoir after a course of 480 mi (775 km). It is navigable for 300
mi (483 km) and is connected by canals with the BUG and NEMAN rivers.
Priscian
Prix de Rome
interrupted by sudden leaps that represent major technological advances.
Productivity in Europe and the U.S. made great strides following the
development of such technologies as steam power, the railroad, and the
gasoline motor. Later in the 20th century, advances in productivity
stemmed from a number of innovations, including ASSEMBLY LINEs and AUTO-
MATION, COMPUTER-INTEGRATED MANUFACTURING, DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS,
JUST-IN-TIME MANUFACTURING, and just-in-time INVENTOR Y management.
progeria
See also ENDOSCOPY.
producer goods or capital goods or intermediate goods
production management or operations management Plan-
prokaryote
Progressive Conservative Party of Canada Former Canadian
also SUMMERHILL SCHOOL.
in line with the CONSUMER PRICE INDEX. See also REGRESSIVE TAX.
ment of communism during which a “dictatorship of the proletariat”
would suppress resistance to the socialist revolution by the bourgeoisie,
destroy the social relations of production underlying the class system, and
create a new, classless society.
proline
tem. See also LOGIC, PREDICATE CALCULUS, laws of THOUGHT.
proprioception
by low-income groups. See also CAPITAL-GAINS TAX; CONSUMPTION TAX; INCOME
TAX; PROGRESSIVE TAX; REGRESSIVE TAX.
prophet Person who speaks by divine inspiration, revealing or inter-
preting the will of a god. Prophets have appeared in many religions
throughout history. The most familiar in the West are such OLD TESTAMENT
leaders as MOSES, ISAIAH, and DANIEL, along with the Prophet MUHAMMAD.
In contrast to the diviner or interpreter of omens (see DIVINATION), who may
answer private questions, prophets often address the destiny and moral
life of a whole people. Some prophets seek to create a new society that
will realize their message and thus found new religions. Others may look
only to reform or purify an existing society and religion. The tone of
prophecy ranges widely, from ecstasy, inspired utterance, and ethical fer-
vor to passionate social criticism, prediction of the future, and expecta-
tion of APOCALYPSE.
ISLATIVE APPORTIONMENT.
propositional attitude Psychological state expressed by a verb that
may take a subordinate clause beginning with “that” as its complement.
Verbs such as “believe,” “hope,” “fear,” “desire,” “intend,” and “know”
MALLARMÉ, ARTHUR RIMBAUD, FRIEDRICH HÖLDERLIN, NOVALIS, and RAINER MARIA
RILKE, and in the 20th, AMY LOWELL (in her “polyphonic prose”) and such
contemporary poets as JOHN ASHBER Y.
prosecutor Government attorney who presents the state’s case against
the defendant in a criminal prosecution. In some countries (France, Japan),
public prosecution is carried out by a single office. In the U.S., states and
counties have their own prosecutors. Only at the federal level is the sys-
tem unitary; the U.S. attorney general’s office appoints a U.S. attorney for
each federal district. In most state and local jurisdictions, prosecutors are
elected to office. Whether elected or appointed, prosecutors are often sub-
ject to political pressures. A prosecutor takes charge of the investigation
once a crime has been committed, presents evidence at a hearing before
a grand jury, and questions witnesses during the trial. See also INDEPENDENT
COUNSEL.
Proserpina See PERSEPHONE
prosody
sion, but in 1947 it became one of 23 nations to sign the GENERAL AGREEMENT
ON TARIFFS AND TRADE (GATT), which substantially reduced customs tariffs
while reducing or eliminating quotas. Despite trade agreements such as
GATT and NAFTA, calls for protectionism are still heard in many coun-
tries when industries suffer severely from foreign competition. See also
TRADE AGREEMENT; WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION.
proteolysis
Protococcus
INTERNATIONAL.
Proulx
EASE; he later studied the related sheep disorder scrapie and in 1982
reported isolation of its causative agent, which he called a prion. Initially
criticized, his prion theory was eventually generally accepted, and his
research received world attention when MAD COW DISEASE emerged in Brit-
ain. The theory may also shed light on disorders such as ALZHEIMER DISEASE
and PARKINSONISM, which share traits with prion-based diseases. His work
won him a 1997 Nobel Prize.
Prussia German Preussen
psychoneurosis See NEUROSIS
psychosis
CHOLOGY. In INFANCY, language is acquired, PERCEPTION, EMOTION, and MEMOR Y
take shape, and learning and motor skills develop. In childhood, SPEECH
emerges, cognitive abilities advance from concrete to abstract operations,
emotional responses become more sophisticated, and EMPATHY and moral
reasoning begin to be employed. ADOLESCENCE is a time of rapid emotional
and intellectual growth, while ADULTHOOD is characterized by the maturing
of all developmental processes.
psychological testing Use of tests to measure skill, knowledge, intel-
ligence, capacities, or aptitudes and to make predictions about perfor-
mance. Best known is the IQ test; other tests include achievement tests—
designed to evaluate a student’s grade or performance level—and
PERSONALITY tests. The latter include both inventory-type (question-and-
response) tests and projective tests such as the Rorschach (inkblot) and
thematic apperception (picture-theme) tests, which are used by clinical
psychologists and psychiatrists to help diagnose mental disorders and by
psychotherapists and counselors to help assess their clients. Experimen-
tal psychologists routinely devise tests to obtain data on PERCEPTION, LEARN-
ING, and MOTIVATION. Clinical neuropsychologists often use tests to assess
cognitive functioning of people with brain injuries. See also EXPERIMENTAL
PSYCHOLOGY; PSYCHOMETRICS.
OGY, EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY, sports psychology, SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY, and
COMPARATIVE PSYCHOLOGY. The issues studied by psychologists cover a wide
spectrum, including LEARNING, COGNITION, INTELLIGENCE, motivation, EMOTION,
PERCEPTION, PERSONALITY, and the extent to which individual differences are
shaped by genetics or environment. The methods used in psychological
research include observation, interviews, PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING, laboratory
experimentation, and statistical analysis.
psychometrics Science of psychological measurement. Psychometri-
cians design and administer psychological tests (see PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING),
ptarmigan
through the construction of highways and public buildings. Authorized by
the National Industrial Recovery Act (1933) and administered by Harold
Ickes, it spent about $4 billion to build schools, courthouses, city halls,
public-health facilities, and roads, bridges, dams, and subways. It was
gradually dismantled as the country moved to a military-industrial
economy during World War II.
Public Works of Art Project (PWAP) First of the U.S. federal art
Pucci
deaths and a proliferation of hospitals. Britain’s Public Health Act of 1848
established a special public health ministry. In the U.S., public health is
studied and coordinated on a national level by the CENTERS FOR DISEASE
CONTROL AND PREVENTION; internationally, the WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Public Safety, Committee of See COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC SAFETY
public school or independent school In the United Kingdom, any
of a small group of tuition-charging secondary schools that specialize in
preparing students for university and for public service. The name public
school dates from the 18th century, when the schools began attracting stu-
dents from beyond their immediate environs and thus became “public” as
opposed to local. Such schools are thus in fact private schools indepen-
dent of the state system. Although many schools have become coeduca-
tional, only boys attend the historically important schools Winchester
(1394), ETON (1440–41), Westminster (1560), and HARROW (1571); well-
known girls’ schools include Cheltenham (1853), Roedean (1885), and
Wycomb Abbey (1896). Public schools cultivated a class-conscious code
of behaviour, speech, and appearance that set the standard for British offi-
cialdom from the early 19th century. See also SECONDAR Y EDUCATION.
public television See PBS
public transportation See MASS TRANSIT
public utility Enterprise that provides certain classes of services to the
public, including common-carrier transportation (buses, airlines, rail-
roads); telephone and telegraph services; power, heat and light; and com-
munity facilities for water and sanitation. In most countries such
enterprises are state-owned and state-operated; in the U.S. they are mainly
privately owned, but they operate under close regulation. Given the tech-
nology of production and distribution,
they are considered natural
MONOPOLIES, since the CAPITAL costs for such enterprises are large and the
existence of competing or parallel systems would be inordinately expen-
sive and wasteful. Government regulation in the U.S., particularly at the
state level, aims to ensure safe operation, reasonable rates, and service on
equal terms to all customers. Some states have experimented with deregu-
lation of electricity and natural-gas operations to stimulate price reduc-
tions and improved service through competition, but the results have not
been universally promising.
Public Works Administration U.S. government agency (1933–39).
It was established as part of the NEW DEAL to reduce unemployment
Puente
Pugachov
pulmonary alveolus
PRESS.
Punctation of Olmütz See OLMÜTZ, PUNCTATION OF
built for the usually itinerant puppeteers. Companies presented favourite
stories of the French Guignol,
the Italian Arlecchino,
the German
Kasperle, and the English PUNCH and Judy. By the mid 20th century pup-
petry had reached television with JIM HENSON’s Muppets. See also BUN-
RAKU; SERGEY OBRAZTSOV.
Puracé
the stretch of the AMAZON RIVER upstream from MANAUS known as the
Solimões River. At its mouth it divides into numerous branches. Most of
its 1,995-mi (3,211-km) course is navigable, as are the many lakes formed
near its shores. Rubber is gathered from forests along its course.
purusha See PRAKRITI AND PURUSHA
Pusan
pyelonephritis
member, pyrimidine itself (C4H4N2), is not common, but derivatives with
the structure are. Examples include THIAMINE (vitamin B1), several SULFA
DRUGS, BARBITURATES, and three of the bases in NUCLEIC ACIDS (CYTOSINE, THYM-
INE, and URACIL).
pyrite
Qadariya
Qayraw)n, Al- See KAIROUAN
Qazvln or Kazvln
Qizilqum See KYZYLKUM
Qo!qon
and farms. Quantrill’s Raiders were made an official troop by the Con-
federates in 1862. In 1863 Quantrill and his group of about 450 men
sacked the free-state town of Lawrence, Kan., killing 150 people. They
later defeated a Union detachment, killing 90 soldiers. Quantrill was mor-
tally wounded in a raid into Kentucky.
quantum In physics, a discrete natural unit, or packet, of energy, charge,
angular momentum, or other physical property. Light, for example, which
appears in some respects as a continuous electromagnetic wave, on the
submicroscopic level is emitted and absorbed in discrete amounts, or
quanta; for light of a given wavelength, the magnitude of all the quanta
emitted or absorbed is the same in both energy and momentum. These
particlelike packets of light are called PHOTONS, a term also applicable to
quanta of other forms of electromagnetic energy such as X RAYS and GAMMA
RAYS. Submicroscopic mechanical vibrations in the layers of atoms com-
prising CR YSTALS also give up or take on energy and momentum in quanta
called PHONONS. See also QUANTUM MECHANICS.
quantum chromodynamics (QCD) Theory that describes the
PUTING, QUANTUM MECHANICS.
quantum electrodynamics (QED) Quantum theory of the interac-
THEOR Y, UNIFIED FIELD THEOR Y.
quantum mechanics Branch of mathematical physics that deals with
atomic and subatomic systems. It is concerned with phenomena that are
so small-scale that they cannot be described in classical terms, and it is
formulated entirely in terms of statistical probabilities. Considered one of
the great ideas of the 20th century, quantum mechanics was developed
mainly by NIELS BOHR, ERWIN SCHRÖDINGER, WERNER HEISENBERG, and MAX
BORN and led to a drastic reappraisal of the concept of objective reality. It
explained the structure of ATOMs, atomic nuclei (see NUCLEUS), and MOL-
ECULEs; the behaviour of SUBATOMIC PARTICLEs; the nature of chemical bonds
(see BONDING); the properties of crystalline solids (see CR YSTAL); NUCLEAR
ENERGY; and the forces that stabilize collapsed STARs. It also led directly to
the development of the LASER, the ELECTRON MICROSCOPE, and the TRANSISTOR.
Qu’Appelle
quasar
Queneau
the QUEEN CHARLOTTE ISLANDS and on the south by VANCOUVER ISLAND, the
Queen Elizabeth National Park or Ruwenzori National
the theory of probability to social phenomena. He collected and analyzed
government statistics on crime, mortality, and other subjects and devised
improvements
in census
taking.
In Sur
l’homme
(1835)
L’Anthropométrie (1871) he developed the notion of the homme moyen,
the statistically “average man.” A founder of quantitative social science,
he was nonetheless widely criticized for the crudeness of his methodology.
quetzal
quinine
attempt to ring it or come as near to it as possible. Quoits may have been
played in Roman-occupied Britain (1st–5th century AD), and it may have
given rise to HORSESHOE PITCHING.
Q(qon See QO!QON
Qur#)n
Ra See RE
Rabanus Maurus or Hrabanus Maurus
ringed tail and a black mask on the
face. The North American raccoon
(P. lotor) has a stout body, short legs,
pointed muzzle, and small erect ears.
is 30–36 in. (75–90 cm) long,
including the 10-in. (25-cm) tail, and
weighs over 22 lb (10 kg). The
shaggy, coarse fur is iron-gray to
blackish. The feet resemble slender
human hands. Raccoons eat arthro-
pods, rodents, frogs, berries, fruit,
and plants; in towns and cities they
thrive on garbage. They prefer woods
near water and usually live in hollow
trees. The crab-eating raccoon (P.
cancrivorus) of South America is
similar but has coarser fur.
race Term once commonly used in
PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY to denote a
and history. See also CLIMATIC ADAPTATION, ETHNIC GROUP, RACISM.
racemate
London newspaper, he also began illustrating books. He became skillful
using the new halftone process, and his highly detailed drawings revealed
a unique imagination. He achieved renown with a 1900 edition of
Grimm’s Fairy Tales, and his illustrations for Rip Van Winkle (1905)
brought him recognition in America as well. Altogether he illustrated more
than 60 books, including classics of children’s literature as well as works
by WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, CHARLES DICKENS, JOHN MILTON, RICHARD WAGNER, and
EDGAR ALLAN POE.
radar astronomy See RADIO AND RADAR ASTRONOMY
NOVEL.
Radcliffe-Brown, A(lfred) R(eginald) (b. Jan. 17, 1881, Birming-
ham, Warwick, Eng.—d. Oct. 24, 1955, London) British social anthro-
pologist. He taught at the universities of Cape Town, Sydney, Chicago,
and Oxford. In his version of FUNCTIONALISM, he viewed the component parts
of society (e.g., the kinship system, the legal system) as having an indis-
pensable function for one another, the continued existence of one com-
ponent being dependent on that of the other, and he developed a
systematic framework of concepts relating to the social structures of
small-scale societies. He had a profound impact on British and American
social anthropology. Among his major works are The Andaman Islanders
(1922) and Structure and Function in Primitive Society (1952).
Radek
CIRCUITS. See also RADIO AND RADAR ASTRONOMY.
radio broadcasting See BROADCASTING
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Radical Republican (cid:2) radish
Lovell Telescope, a fully steerable radio telescope at Jodrell Bank, Macclesfield,
Cheshire, Eng.
JODRELL BANK SCIENCE CENTRE
radiocarbon dating See CARBON-14 DATING
radiology Branch of medicine that uses RADIATION for diagnosis (DIAGNOS-
TIC IMAGING) and treatment (RADIATION THERAPY) of disease. Originally, it
involved X RAYS for diagnosis and X rays, GAMMA RAYS, and other ionizing
radiation for treatment. Diagnostic methods now include isotope scanning
(see NUCLEAR MEDICINE), use of nonion-
izing radiation, as in ULTRASOUND and
magnetic resonance imaging, and
radioimmunoassay (in which radio-
active isotopes in antibodies against
hormones detect minute amounts of
hormones for diagnosis of endocrine
disorders).
Radiotherapy
includes, in cancer treatment, radio-
active hormones and chemothera-
peutic drugs.
radiotherapy
RADIATION
THERAPY
radish Annual or biennial plant
(Raphanus sativus) of the MUSTARD
FAMILY, probably of Oriental origin,
Radish (Raphanus sativus variety radic-
INGMAR HOLMASEN
grown for its large, succulent root.
Low in calories and high in bulk,
radishes have a sharp taste and are
usually eaten raw. The shape of the
edible portion of the root varies
greatly, as does the color
(from
white through pink to red, purple,
and black). Radishes may weigh
only a few ounces (U.S. and Euro-
pean varieties) or, in the case of the
Japanese daikon, more than 2 lbs (1
Radishchev
(1854), he gave an ambiguous order in the Battle of BALAKLAVA that led to
the disastrous charge of the Light Cavalry Brigade under the earl of CAR-
DIGAN. Raglan became the scapegoat for the campaign’s lack of progress
and the inadequate supplies to the troops in the winter of 1854–55. His
name was applied to the raglan sleeve, probably designed to adapt his
coat to the arm he had amputated after the Battle of WATERLOO.
Ragnarök
Rainey, Ma orig. Gertrude Malissa Nix Pridgett (b. April 26,
Rainier
Rally for the Republic (RPR) or Gaullists Former French politi-
cal party. It was founded by JACQUES CHIRAC in 1976 as the successor to
the various Gaullist coalitions that dominated the political life of the FIFTH
REPUBLIC under CHARLES DE GAULLE and GEORGES POMPIDOU. The party had its
religious life. In 1901 he left his wife and children and went into seclu-
sion in the Himalayas, and he later traveled to Japan and the U.S. He
became known for his poetic manner of interpreting VEDANTA and for his
joyful approach to religious learning as a means to the liberation of the
individual. He died by drowning in the Ganges.
Ramayana
Rangeley
its peak in the 1880s. By the early 20th century, overstocking, quarantine
laws, railroad competition, and barbed-wire fences had put an end to cattle
drives and open-range farming. Ranching today is nearly all sedentary,
but huge ranches still exist.
Rand, Ayn orig. Alice Rosenbaum or Alissa Rosenbaum (b.
random-access memory See RAM
Rankine
Raphael In the BIBLE and the QUR#0N, one of the archangels. In the apoc-
ryphal book of Tobit he appears in human disguise and conquers the
demon Asmodeus. His name in Hebrew means “God has healed,” and in
Tobit his business is to heal the earth. Raphael is reckoned among the
saints in both Eastern and Western churches, and his feast day is October
Rapier
Rathbone, (Philip St. John) Basil (b. June 13, 1892, Johannesburg,
Rathenau
Rauschenberg
MANTA RAY.
FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT to JOHN F. KENNEDY.
Rayleigh
Ray, Man See MAN Ray
Ray, Nicholas orig. Raymond Nicholas Kienzle (b. Aug. 7,
ray flower See COMPOSITE FAMILY
Rayburn, Sam(uel) (Taliaferro) (b. Jan. 6, 1882, Roane county,
Tenn., U.S.—d. Nov. 16, 1961, Bonham, Texas) U.S. politician. He taught
school in Texas before becoming a lawyer. He served in the state legis-
lature from 1907 to 1913. In 1912 he was elected as a Democrat to the
U.S. House of Representatives, where he served for the next 48 years,
Rayonism
JASPER JOHNS.
Reagan
Récamier
red elm See SLIPPER Y ELM
DYNASTY.
older BLACK-FIGURE POTTER Y as the pre-
red fox or common fox Either
of two FOX species: Vulpes vulpes,
found throughout Europe, temperate
Asia, and northern Africa, and V.
fulva of North America. It has a red-
dish brown coat; the tail is white-tipped, and the ears and legs are black.
Red foxes are 36–42 in. (90–105 cm) long, including the 15-in. (38-cm)
tail; they stand about 16 in. (40 cm) tall and weigh about 15 lb (7 kg).
They eat small mammals, eggs, fruit, and birds. They are hunted for sport
and for their fur and are raised commercially for pelts. North American
red foxes exhibit black and silver colour phases.
Red Guards Paramilitary units of radical university and high-school
students formed during the Chinese CULTURAL REVOLUTION. Responding in
1966 to MAO ZEDONG’s call to revitalize the revolutionary spirit of the CHI-
NESE COMMUNIST PARTY, they went so far as to attempt to purge the country
of its pre-Communist culture. With a membership in the millions, they
attacked and persecuted local party leaders, schoolteachers, and other
intellectuals. By early 1967 they had overthrown party authorities in many
localities. Internal strife ensued as different units argued over which
among them best represented MAOISM. In 1968 their disruption of indus-
trial production and urban life led the government to redirect them to the
countryside, where the movement gradually subsided.
Red River Chinese Yuan Chiang
SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS.
Red Army Faction See BAADER-MEINHOF GANG
Redford (Jr.), (Charles) Robert (b. Aug. 18, 1937, Santa Monica,
Redgrave, Sir Michael (Scudamore) (b. March 20, 1908, Bris-
red salmon See SOCKEYE SALMON
Red Sea Narrow inland sea between the ARABIAN PENINSULA and Africa.
It extends southeast from Suez, Egypt, for about 1,200 mi (1,930 km) to
the Strait of MANDEB, which connects with the Gulf of ADEN and then with
the Arabian Sea. It separates the coasts of Egypt, The Sudan, and Eritrea
from those of Saudi Arabia and Yemen. It contains some of the world’s
warmest and saltiest seawater. With its connection to the Mediterranean
Sea via the SUEZ CANAL, it is one of the most heavily traveled waterways
in the world, carrying traffic between Europe and Asia. Its name is derived
from the colour changes observed in its waters.
red soil Any of a group of soils that develop in a warm, temperate, moist
climate under deciduous or mixed forests and that have thin organic and
organic-mineral layers overlying a yellowish-brown leached layer resting
on an illuvial (see ILLUVIATION) red layer. Red soils generally form from
iron-rich SEDIMENTAR Y ROCK. They are usually poor growing soils, low in
nutrients and HUMUS and difficult to cultivate.
red spider See SPIDER MITE
Red Square Large public square, central MOSCOW. It lies north of the
MOSKVA RIVER, adjacent to the Kremlin, and covers some 18 acres (7.3
hectares). Dating from the late 15th century, it has long been a busy mar-
ket area as well as a focal point in Russian history as the scene of execu-
tions, demonstrations, riots, and parades. Located around it are the State
Historical Museum (1875–81), the nine-towered Cathedral of St. Basil the
Blessed (1554–60), the former state department store GUM, and the tomb
of VLADIMIR ILICH LENIN. The square and Kremlin were designated a UNESCO
WORLD HERITAGE SITE in 1990.
HONGWU EMPEROR.
redbird See CARDINAL
redbud Any of the shrubs or small
trees that make up the genus Cercis
(family Leguminosae), native to
North America, southern Europe,
and Asia, and widely planted for
HENRI MATISSE and other painters. His prints (nearly 200 in all), which
explore fantastic, often macabre themes, foreshadowed SURREALISM and
DADA.
Redouté
reed organ See HARMONIUM
Reeds, Plain of Vietnamese Dong Thap Muoi
CONDITIONING; COOLING SYSTEM; HEAT EXCHANGER.
REFUGEE ORGANIZATION; Office of the UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR
REFUGEES; UNITED NATIONS RELIEF AND REHABILITATION ADMINISTRATION.
Refusés, Salon des See SALON DES REFUSÉS
Régence style
regiment In most armies, a body of troops headed by a colonel and
divided into companies, BATTALIONS, or squadrons. French CAVALR Y units
were called regiments as early as 1558. In early U.S. service, as in Euro-
pean armies up to that time, the usual number of companies in a regiment
was 10. Early in the 19th century, NAPOLEON divided the regiments of the
French army into three battalions each, and in 1901 the U.S. Army adopted
the three-battalion INFANTR Y regimental system.
Regina
Reims or Rheims
also OBJECT-ORIENTED PROGRAMMING.
relief or rilievo
ignorance of humanity’s true higher identity and that prayer can bring
about healing not only of spiritual but of physical ailments.
Remagen
blockage, congenital diseases, and tapeworm infestation. The most seri-
ous is medullary cystic disease, which has no warning symptoms but
causes ANEMIA, low blood sodium levels, and UREMIA. The kidneys become
shrunken, grainy, and scarred. Cysts should usually be checked surgically
to rule out cancer. See also UROGENITAL MALFORMATION.
renal failure See KIDNEY FAILURE
renal system See URINAR Y SYSTEM
Renan
Repin
Republican Party, National See NATIONAL REPUBLICAN PARTY
LIOZ, GIUSEPPE VERDI, GABRIEL FAURÉ, JOHANNES BRAHMS, and BENJAMIN BRITTEN.
FAIR TRADE LAW.
resin
petitive in the South for more than a century after the war. Republican
candidates won 14 of 18 presidential elections between 1860 and 1932,
through support from an alliance of Northern and Midwestern farmers and
big-business interests. In 1912 the party split between a progressive wing
led by THEODORE ROOSEVELT and a conservative wing led by Pres. WILLIAM
HOWARD TAFT; the rift enabled the Democratic candidate, Woodrow Wil-
son, to win that year’s election. The Republican Party’s inability to
counter the impact of the GREAT DEPRESSION led to its ouster from power in
1933; in 1953 the presidency of DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER brought a moder-
ate wing of the party to prominence. The party’s platform remained con-
servative, emphasizing anticommunism, reduced government regulation
Resnais
DNA RECOMBINATION).
restrictive covenant In property law, an agreement acknowledged in
a deed or lease that restricts the free use or occupancy of property, such
as by forbidding commercial use or certain types of structures. The restric-
tive covenant is as old as the law of property, being well-established in
Roman law. The term is also used in business law to refer to an agree-
ment whereby one party promises not to engage in the same business or
a similar business in a particular area for a period of time.
retailing Selling of merchandise directly to the consumer. Retailing
began several thousand years ago with peddlers hawking their wares at
the earliest marketplaces. It is extremely competitive, and the failure rate
of retail establishments is relatively high. Price is the most important arena
of competition, but other factors include convenience of location, selec-
tion and display of merchandise, attractiveness of the establishment, and
reputation. The diversity of retailing is evident in the many forms it now
takes, including VENDING MACHINEs, door-to-door and telephone sales, DIRECT-
MAIL MARKETING, the Internet, discount houses, specialty stores, DEPARTMENT
STOREs, supermarkets, and consumer COOPERATIVEs.
retaining wall or revetment Wall constructed to hold in place a
mass of earth or prevent the erosion of an embankment. It may also be
battered, with the face inclined toward the load it is bearing. The most
basic type of reinforced retaining wall is the massive concrete gravity
wall, which is prevented from falling over by the sheer weight and vol-
ume of its mass. A CANTILEVER (L-shaped) retaining wall resists overturn-
ing by means of cantilever footings, spread footings (see FOUNDATION)
shaped to resist overturning and sliding.
reticuloendothelial
Restoration Restoration of the monarchy in England in 1660. It marked
the return of CHARLES II as king (1660–85) following the period of OLIVER
CROMWELL’s Commonwealth. The bishops were restored to Parliament,
which established a strict Anglican orthodoxy. The period, which also
included the reign of JAMES II (1685–88), was marked by an expansion in
colonial trade, the ANGLO-DUTCH WARS, and a revival of drama and litera-
ture (see RESTORATION LITERATURE).
LIAM WYCHERLY, JOHN VANBRUGH, WILLIAM CONGREVE, and GEORGE FARQUHAR.
retrovirus
revetment See RETAINING WALL
Revillagigedo
course of a year, written in peasant dialect. Translated into many languages,
it won Reymont the 1924 Nobel Prize for Literature.
Reynaud
rheumatic
Rhodesia See ZIMBABWE
Rhodesian ridgeback or African lion dog South African hound
breed characterized by a narrow
band of hair growing forward along
its back, against the direction of the
rest of the coat. The ridge is inher-
ited from a half-wild local hunting
dog that was crossbred with Euro-
pean dogs. Strong, active, and of
great endurance, it is trim and short-
haired, with hanging ears and a
glossy brown coat. It stands 24–27
in. (61–69 cm) and weighs 65–75 lbs
(30–34 kg). It is an able guard and
hunter (especially of lions) and a
good companion.
Rhodian Sea Law
One of the SEVEN WONDERS OF THE
WORLD, it was toppled by an earth-
quake c. 225 BC. The fallen Colossus
was left in place until AD 653, when
raiding Arabs broke up its remains
and sold the bronze for scrap.
Rhodes scholarship Grant
attend the University of OXFORD. The
program was established in 1902 by
the will of CECIL RHODES. Until 1976,
candidates had to be unmarried male
residents in a Commonwealth coun-
try, the U.S., or South Africa. In 1976
women were accepted. Two candi-
dates each year are also chosen from
Germany. The scholarships, which
are highly competitive, are usually for two years.
Rhodesia Region, south-central Africa, now divided into ZIMBABWE in
the south and ZAMBIA in the north. Named after British colonial adminis-
trator CECIL RHODES, it was administered by the British South Africa Com-
pany in the 19th century and exploited mostly for its gold, copper, and
coal deposits. In 1911 it was divided into Northern and Southern Rhode-
sia; Southern Rhodesia became a self-governing British colony (1923) and
Northern Rhodesia a British protectorate (1924). They joined with Nyasa-
land to become the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland (1953–63). See
also MALAWI.
lands from cold northerly winds. The mountains were a refuge for Slavic
peoples during the period of Turkish rule (15th–19th century), and ancient
customs survive. The lakes, river valleys, and extensive forests form the
basis of a tourist industry.
rhodopsin
in the BAROQUE PERIOD.
riboflavin
Richard, (Joseph Henri) Maurice (b. Aug. 4, 1921, Montreal, Que.,
Richards,
I(vor) A(rmstrong)
Richards, (Isaac) Vivian (Alexander) (b. March 7, 1952, St.
Richardson, Henry Handel orig. Ethel Florence Lindesay
Richardson, Sir Ralph (David) (b. Dec. 19, 1902, Cheltenham,
Richardson, Tony orig. Cecil Antonio Richardson (b. June 5,
Richelieu
Richelieu River
(named RICKETTSIA) that causes ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER and epidemic
rickettsia
Rietveld
Río de la Plata, Viceroyalty of the Last of the four viceroyalties
Rio Grande
its in the kingdom in the 1930s transformed the old provincial town into
a showplace of sophisticated technology, modern architecture, and high-
ways. In addition to its administrative role, Riyadh is the kingdom’s com-
mercial, education, and transportation centre.
Rizal (y Alonso)
Robbe-Grillet
Robertson, Pat orig. Marion Gordon Robertson (b. March 23,
Roberval
Robinson, Edward G. orig. Emmanuel Goldenberg (b. Dec.
Robinson, Jackie in full Jack Roosevelt Robinson (b. Jan. 31,
the NEGRO LEAGUES
Robinson, Joan (Violet) orig. Joan (Violet) Maurice (b. Oct.
Robinson, Smokey orig. William Robinson (b. Feb. 19, 1940,
Robinson, Sugar Ray orig. Walker Smith, Jr. (b. May 3, 1921,
BON. Known to the Romans as Promontorium Magnum, the cape is a nar-
row granite cliff, 472 ft (144 m) high, forming the western end of the
Sintra Mountains.
rocaille
Rockingham, Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd marquess
of (b. May 13, 1730—d. July 1, 1782, London, Eng.) British politician.
From 1751 to 1762 he served as gentleman of the bedchamber for GEORGE
II and then GEORGE III, who appointed him prime minister in 1765. He
obtained repeal of the unpopular STAMP ACT but agreed to the passage of
the DECLARATOR Y ACT. His ministry collapsed through internal dissension in
1766. He and EDMUND BURKE led the parliamentary opposition to the min-
istries in power and spoke in favour of independence for the American
colonies. In his brief second ministry (1782), he began peace negotiations
with the U.S. and obtained legislative independence for the Irish parlia-
ment.
Rockne
into the METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART).
LAWS OF MOTION).
rocket See ARUGULA
rockfish or stonefish Name applied to species in the SCORPION-FISH
family (Scorpaenidae), including the LIONFISH, REDFISH, and ZEBRA FISH. In
and gypsum. ROCKY MOUNTAIN, YELLOWSTONE, and GRAND TETON national
parks in the U.S. are major recreational facilities.
Rococo
Roebling
near Point Barrow, Alaska) U.S. humorist and actor. Raised in Indian Ter-
ritory, he demonstrated his rope-twirling skills in Wild West shows and
vaudeville and gradually wove bits of homespun wit into his act. He was
popular in New York City from 1905 and starred in FLORENZ ZIEGFELD’s
Midnight Frolic (1915). Noted for his good-natured but sharp criticism of
current affairs, he wrote a newspaper column in the New York Times (from
1922) as well as several books. He performed on radio and in movies
such as State Fair (1933) and Steamboat Round the Bend (1935). His
death in a plane crash in Alaska with the aviator Wiley Post (1899–1935)
was widely mourned.
Roget
Rolle’s theorem
roman à clef
FRENCH, SPANISH, PORTUGUESE,
Roman Republic and Empire (cid:2) Romania
Roman Emperors*
Augustus
27 BC–AD 14
Tiberius
14–37
Caligula
37–41
Claudius
41–54
54–68
Galba
68–69
Vitellius
Vespasian
69–79
Titus
79–81
Domitian
81–96
Nerva
96–98
Trajan
98–117
Hadrian
117–38
Antoninus Pius
138–61
Marcus Aurelius
161–80
Lucius Verus
161–69
Commodus
177–92
Pertinax
Didius Julianus
Septimius Severus
193–211
Caracalla
198–217
209–12
Macrinus
217–18
Elagabalus
218–22
Severus Alexander
222–35
Maximin
235–38
Gordian I
Gordian II
Maximus
Balbinus
Gordian III
238–44
Philip
244–49
Decius
249–51
Hostilian
Gallus
251–53
Aemilian
Valerian
253–60
Gallienus
253–68
Claudius II Gothicus
268–70
Quintillus
269–70
Aurelian
270–75
Tacitus
275–76
Florian
Probus
276–82
*For Eastern emperors after the fall of Rome, see BYZANTINE EMPIRE.
Carus
Carinus
Numerian
Constantine I
Constantine II
Constans I
Constantius II
Magnentius
Julian
Jovian
Theodosius I
East only
Diocletian
Galerius
Licinius
Valens
Procopius
Arcadius
Theodosius II
Marcian
Leo I
Leo II
West only
Maximian
Constantius I Chlorus 
Severus
Maxentius
Valentinian I
Gratian
Valentinian II
Honorius
Constantius III
Valentinian III
Petronius Maximus
Avitus
Majorian
Libius Severus
Anthemius
Olybrius
Glycerius
Julius Nepos
Romulus Augustulus
282–83
283–85
283–84
312–37
337–40
337–50
337–61
350–53
361–63
363–64
379–95
284–305
305–11
308–24
364–78
365–66
395–408
408–50
450–57
457–74
474–91
286–305
306–8
305–6
306–7
306–12
364–75
375–83
375–92
395–423
425–55
455–56
457–61
461–67
467–72
473–74
474–75
475–76
of learning. See also ROMANESQUE ARCHITECTURE.
Romania or Rumania Country, northeastern BALKAN PENINSULA, south-
eastern Europe. Area: 92,043 sq mi (238,391 sq km). Population (2005
est.): 21,602,000. Capital: BUCHAREST. Most of the people are Romanian; a
minority are Hungarian. Language: Romanian (official). Religion: Chris-
tianity (predominantly Eastern Orthodox; also Protestant, Roman Catho-
lic). Currency: leu. The land is dominated by the great arc of the CARPATHIAN
MOUNTAINS, whose highest peak, Moldoveanu, reaches an elevation of
8,346 ft (2,544 m). The DANUBE RIVER forms most of the southern boundary
with Bulgaria. Under communist rule (1948–89), Romania had a centrally
planned economy that was transformed from an agricultural into an indus-
trial economy. From 1991 the postcommunist government began returning
industrial and commercial enterprises to the private sector. Romania is a
republic with two legislative houses; its chief of state is the president, and
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Romanian language
created the EUROPEAN ATOMIC ENERGY COMMUNITY.
Rommel
ment agency for their protection. The state of Rondônia, created in 1982
from the former Guaporé territory, was named for him.
r§nin
rorqual
Roosevelt, Theodore known as Teddy Roosevelt (b. Oct. 27,
1858, New York, N.Y., U.S.—d. Jan. 6, 1919, Oyster Bay, N.Y.) 26th
president of the U.S. (1901–09). He was elected to the New York legis-
lature (1882), where he became a Republican leader opposed to the Demo-
cratic political machine. After political defeats and the death of his wife,
he went to the Dakota Territory to ranch. He returned to New York to
serve on the U.S. Civil Service Commission (1889–95) and as head of the
city’s board of police commissioners (1895–97). A supporter of WILLIAM
MCKINLEY, he served as assistant secretary of the navy (1897–98). When
the SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR was declared, he resigned to organize a cavalry
unit, the ROUGH RIDERS. He returned to New York a hero and was elected
governor in 1899. As the Republican vice-presidential nominee, he took
office when McKinley was reelected, and he became president on Mc-
Kinley’s assassination in 1901. One of his early initiatives was to urge
enforcement of the SHERMAN ANTITRUST ACT against business monopolies.
He won election in his own right in 1904, defeating ALTON PARKER. At his
urging, Congress regulated railroad rates and passed the Pure Food and
Drug Act and Meat Inspection Act (1906) to protect public health. He
created national forests and set aside mineral, oil, and coal deposits for
conservation. He and secretary of state ELIHU ROOT announced the
Roosevelt corollary to the MONROE DOCTRINE, which reasserted the U.S.’s
position as protector of the Western Hemisphere. For mediating an end
to the RUSSO-JAPANESE WAR, he received the 1906 Nobel Prize for Peace.
He secured a treaty with Panama for construction of a trans-isthmus canal.
Declining to seek reelection, he secured the nomination for WILLIAM H.
TAFT. After traveling in Africa and Europe, he tried to win the Republican
presidential nomination in 1912; when he was rejected, he organized the
BULL MOOSE PARTY and ran on a policy of NEW NATIONALISM. Though he lost
the election, he secured 88 electoral votes—the most successful third-
party candidacy in the 20th century. Throughout his life he continued to
write, publishing extensively on history, politics, travel, and nature. See
also BIG STICK POLICY; THEODORE ROOSEVELT NATIONAL PARK.
Roosevelt Island formerly (until 1921) Blackwell’s Island and
Rosa, Salvator (b.
Rosas
larly noteworthy. In later FLAMBOYANT-STYLE tracery, the radiating elements
consisted of an intricate network of wavy, double-curved bars.
Roseau
tions (1911–12) to the South Pole by ROALD AMUNDSEN and ROBERT FALCON
SCOTT and RICHARD E. BYRD’s expeditions (1928–41). It is the site of sev-
eral permanent research stations.
Rosse, William Parsons, 3rd earl of (b. June 17, 1800, York,
Rossellini
Ross, Diana See SUPREMES
Ross, John Indian name Tsan-Usdi (“Little John”) (b. Oct. 3,
BURNE-JONES
and WILLIAM MORRIS.
more easily sell
to acquaintances,
and became very successful. The
group broke up in 1852, but Rossetti
in 1856 with EDWARD
revived it
After the death of his long-ailing
wife in 1862, possibly by suicide, lit-
erary themes gave way to pictures of
women, particularly Morris’s wife,
Jane. His poetry, including the son-
net sequence “The House of Life,”
was widely admired. He broke with
Morris in 1875 over his love for Jane
and spent his later years as an alco-
holic recluse.
Rossetti, Gabriele (Pasquale
Giuseppe)
dren, including CHRISTINA ROSSETTI and DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI.
Rossini, Gioacchino (Antonio) (b. Feb. 29, 1792, Pesaro, Papal
Rosso
Rothko, Mark orig. Marcus Rothkowitz (b. Sept. 25, 1903,
rotifer
Rousseau
Royal Greenwich
to COVENT GARDEN in 1946. ALICIA MARKOVA, MARGOT FONTEYN, and ROBERT
HELPMANN were among the company’s early members. By the 1950s the
Sadler’s Wells Ballet had expanded to include its own school and a sepa-
rate touring company; in 1956 it received a royal charter and was renamed
the Royal Ballet. Dancers such as RUDOLF NUREYEV and choreographers such
as FREDERICK ASHTON, KENNETH MACMILLAN, and BRONISLAVA NIJINSKA were
associated with the company.
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew See KEW GARDENS
Royal Canadian Mounted Police or Mounties Federal police
force of Canada. It is also the criminal and provincial force in all prov-
inces except Ontario and Quebec and the only force in the Yukon, North-
west, and Nunavut territories. It was founded as the North West Mounted
Police (1873) with a force of 300 men to bring order to western Canada,
where U.S. traders were creating havoc by trading whiskey to the Indi-
ans for furs. That success was followed by peacekeeping in the KLONDIKE
GOLD RUSH (1898) and later settlement of the west. The group assumed its
current name in 1920, when it became a federal force and its headquar-
ters were moved to Ottawa.
Royal Dutch Shell PLC formerly Royal Dutch/Shell Group
Multinational corporation comprising two founding companies, Royal
Dutch Petroleum Co. of The Hague, Neth., and Shell Transport and Trad-
ing Co., PLC, of London, Eng. The two companies began as rivals. In
London in 1878, Marcus Samuel took over his father’s import-export
business (which included Oriental shells) and started selling kerosene; he
later entered the oil business in East Asia, and in 1897 he founded Shell
Transport and Trading Co., Ltd. Meanwhile, in 1890 a group of Dutch
Rozelle, Pete orig. Alvin Ray Rozelle (b. March 1, 1926, South
Ruanda-Urundi
forces over the Rubicon into Italy in 49 BC violated the law that forbade
a general to lead an army out of the province to which he was assigned.
Caesar’s act thus amounted to a declaration of war against the Roman
Senate and resulted in the three-year civil war that left Caesar ruler of the
Roman world. “Crossing the Rubicon” became a popular phrase describ-
ing a step that irrevocably commits a person to a given course of action.
rubidium-strontium
Rudolphi’s rorqual See SEI WHALE
rue family or citrus family
LEMON,
LIME,
ORANGE, GRAPEFRUIT, CITRON, and KUM-
ruminant
Rushdie
1654 I Russell (cid:2) Russian Civil War
Russell (of Kingston Russell), John Russell, 1st Earl (b. Aug.
18, 1792, London, Eng.—d. May 28, 1878, Pembroke Lodge, Richmond
Park, Surrey) British politician and prime minister (1846–52, 1865–66).
A member of the prominent RUSSELL FAMILY, he entered Parliament in 1813.
He was a strong advocate of reform and made it a cause of the WHIG PARTY,
leading the effort to pass the REFORM BILL OF 1832. He served in Viscount
MELBOURNE’s government as home secretary (1835), reducing the number
of crimes liable to capital punishment and beginning state support of pub-
lic education. In the 1840s he advocated free trade and forced ROBERT PEEL
out of office. Russell became prime minister in 1846 and established the
10-hour day in factories (1847) and a board of public health (1848), but
party disunity defeated his attempts at wider social and economic reform.
Russell, Lillian orig. Helen Louise Leonard (b. Dec. 4, 1861,
Russell Cave National Monument National Monument, north-
losopher BERTRAND RUSSELL.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Leaders of Muscovy, Russia, and the Russian Empire
Princes of Muscovy:
Danilovich dynasty*
Daniel (son of
Alexander Nevsky)
Ivan I
Semyon (Simeon)
Ivan II
Dmitry Donskoy
Vasily I
Vasily II
Ivan III
Vasily III
Ivan IV
Czars of Russia:
Danilovich dynasty
Ivan IV
Fyodor I
Czars of Russia:
Time of Troubles
Boris Godunov
Fyodor II
False Dmitry
Vasily (IV)
c.1276–1303
1303–25
1325–40
1340–53
1353–59
1359–89
1389–1425
1425–62
1462–1505
1505–33
1533–47
1547–84
1584–98
1598–1605
1605–6
1606–10
Interregnum
Czars and Empresses
of Russia: Romanov
dynasty**
Michael III
Alexis
Fyodor III
Peter I (Ivan V
coruler 1682–96 )
Catherine I
Peter II
Ivan VI
Elizabeth
Peter III***
Catherine II
Alexander I
Nicholas I
Alexander II
Alexander III
Nicholas II
1610–12
1613–45
1645–76
1676–82
1682–1725
1725–27
1727–30
1730–40
1740–41
1741–61
(O.S.)
1761–62
(O.S.)
1762–96
1796–1801
1801–25
1825–55
1855–81
1881–94
1894–1917
*The Danilovich dynasty is a late branch of the Rurik dynasty, named after
its progenitor, Daniel.
**In 1721 Peter I the Great took the title of “emperor” (Russian: imperator),
considering it a larger, more European title than the Russian “czar.”
However, every male sovereign continued usually to be called czar (and his
consort czarina, or czaritsa), though every female sovereign was conven-
tionally called empress (imperatritsa).
***The direct line of the Romanov dynasty came to an end in 1761 with the
death of Elizabeth, daughter of Peter I, but subsequent rulers of the
“Holstein–Gottorp dynasty” (the first, Peter III, was son of Charles Frederick,
duke of Holstein–Gottorp, and Anna, daughter of Peter I) took the family
name of Romanov.
Russian Formalism (cid:2) Russian Orthodox Church
Russian Formalism See FORMALISM
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
rutabaga
GUCHKOV; JULY DAYS; RUSSIAN CIVIL WAR.
Russian Social-Democratic Workers’ Party Marxist revolu-
tionary party that preceded the COMMUNIST PARTY OF THE SOVIET UNION.
Founded in Minsk in 1898, it held that Russia could achieve socialism
only after developing a bourgeois society with an urban proletariat. The
party split in 1903 because of the argument between the BOLSHEVIK wing,
led by VLADIMIR ILICH LENIN, and the MENSHEVIK wing, led by L. MARTOV, over
Lenin’s proposals for a party composed of professional revolutionaries.
Party members were active in the RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905. In the tur-
moil of the RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1917, the Bolsheviks broke completely
with the Mensheviks and changed their name to “Russian Communist
Party (Bolshevik).”
Russo-Finnish War or Winter War (1939–40) War waged by the
Soviet Union against Finland at the start of WORLD WAR II, following the
signing of the GERMAN-SOVIET NONAGGRESSION PACT. When Finland refused
to grant the Soviets a naval base and other concessions, Soviet troops
attacked on several fronts in November 1939. The heavily outnumbered
Finns under Carl Gustav Emil MANNERHEIM put up a skillful defense until
February 1940, when heavy Russian bombardments breached the Finns’
southern defenses. A peace treaty in March 1940 ceded western Karelia
to Russia and allowed construction of a Soviet naval base on the Hanko
peninsula.
Rutherford of Nelson, Ernest Rutherford, Baron (b. Aug. 30,
Ruthven family
Rybinsk Reservoir
SA in full Sturmabteilung (German: “Assault Division”)
Í) al-hajar See SAIS
Sa-skya pa
U.S. physician and microbiologist. He immigrated to the U.S. with his
parents in 1921 and received an M.D. from New York University. He grew
poliovirus in human nerve tissue outside the body, showed that it does not
enter the body through the respiratory system, and proved that POLIOMY-
ELITIS is primarily an infection of the digestive tract. He postulated that an
oral vaccine would work longer than JONAS SALK’s injections of killed
virus, and he isolated weakened strains of each of the three types of
poliovirus that would stimulate antibody production but not produce dis-
ease. The Sabin oral polio vaccine, approved for use in the U.S. in 1960,
became the main defense against polio throughout the world.
Sabine
den. Her lyrics from those years
combine lean simplicity with imag-
ery variously tender, searing, or mys-
tical. In the famous title poem of her
collection O the Chimneys (1967),
Israel’s body drifts upward as smoke
from the Nazi death camps. Her best-
known play is Eli (1951). She shared
the 1966 Nobel Prize with S.Y.
AGNON.
Sachsen See SAXONY
Sachsenhausen
Sadducee
Íafl al-Dln
source of hydroelectric power; its shores are in many places cliffs 1,000–
1,800 ft (300–550 m) high. Noted for its scenery, it is a recreational area.
Sahara Largest desert in the world, encompassing almost all of north-
ern Africa. Covering an area of about 3,500,000 sq mi (9,065,000 sq km),
it is bounded by the ATLANTIC OCEAN, the ATLAS MOUNTAINS, the MEDITERRA-
NEAN SEA, the RED SEA, and the SAHEL region. It includes portions of sev-
eral countries,
including Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt,
Mauritania, Mali, Niger, Chad, and The Sudan. Principal topographic fea-
tures include large oasis depressions, extensive stony plains, rock-strewn
plateaus, abrupt mountains, sand sheets and dunes, and sand seas. Huge
areas of it are empty, but scattered clusters of inhabitants survive in frag-
ile ecological balance wherever water sources occur. Sedentary living is
restricted to oasis areas. See also LIBYAN DESERT.
Saharan Arab Democratic Republic Disputed territory of WEST-
ERN SAHARA occupied by MOROCCO. It was a Spanish colony from c. 1884
to 1976. After Spain left, native Saharawi guerrillas (see POLISARIO) based
in Algeria declared a government-in-exile and fought Morocco and Mau-
ritania for control. Mauritania made peace in 1979, whereupon Morocco
claimed the whole territory. A referendum on whether the territory will
remain part of Morocco or become independent has been repeatedly post-
poned. See also hASSAN II.
Sahel
merged with St. Salvator’s in 1747), and the University Library (1612).
A third college, St. Mary’s (1537), has always taught theology exclu-
sively. The medical and dental school became independent as the Uni-
versity of Dundee in 1967.
Saint Augustine
three banks. They retreated to Canada, where a pursuing U.S. posse cap-
tured several of them, though the posse was forced to surrender them to
Canadian authorities. The Canadians returned the stolen money but later
released the soldiers, causing strained relations between the two coun-
tries.
Saint Andrews City (pop., 1995 est.: 15,000) and seaport, FIFE coun-
cil area, eastern Scotland. It was formerly the ecclesiastical capital of
Scotland; its religious traditions began in the 6th century AD, when St.
Kenneth is believed to have formed a Celtic religious community there.
It received a charter in 1160 and was one of the principal towns in Scot-
land in the Middle Ages. In 1472 its archbishop was recognized as the
primate of Scotland, and it took part in the important events of the Scot-
tish Reformation. A popular seaside resort, it is noted for its golf courses
and for the University of ST. ANDREWS.
Saint Andrews, University of Oldest university in Scotland,
founded in 1411 on the outskirts of St. Andrews. The university buildings
include St. Salvator’s College (1450), St. Leonard’s College (1512;
it Santa Cruz. In the mid-17th century it was colonized in turn by the
Dutch, English, Spanish, and French. It was purchased by Denmark in
1733 and sold to the U.S. in 1917. In 1989 it was devastated by a hur-
ricane but recovered with U.S. aid. Tourism is the main industry; rum is
distilled and exported.
Saint-Denis
Saint-Just
SAINT LAWRENCE SEAWAY.
Saint Lawrence Seaway U.S.-Canadian waterway and lock system.
Located along the upper ST. LAWRENCE RIVER, it links the Atlantic Ocean
with the GREAT LAKES. Its construction, carried out in 1954–59, involved
clearing a 186-mi (299-km) stretch of the St. Lawrence River between
MONTREAL and Lake ONTARIO. It included lakes, rivers, locks, and canals
that extended for 2,340 mi (3,766 km) to connect Duluth, Minn., with the
head of the Gulf of ST. LAWRENCE. With the Great Lakes, it provides 9,500
mi (15,285 km) of navigable waterways. It allows deep-draft ocean ves-
sels access to the Great Lakes’ rich industrial and agricultural regions. It
is navigable from April to mid-December.
Saint-Léon
Saint Petersburg Russian Sankt-Peterburg
The original inhabitants, the CARIBs, recog-
nized British sovereignty but revolted in
1795. Most of the Caribs were deported;
many who remained were killed in volcanic
eruptions in 1812 and 1902. In 1969 Saint
Vincent became a self-governing state in association with the United King-
dom, and in 1979 it achieved full independence.
Sainte-Beuve
Sakyamuni
lower level. See also INCOME TAX; PROGRESSIVE TAX.
Salesbury
SALT See STRATETIC ARMS LIMITATION TALKS
Saltillo
Salyut
Samoa, American See AMERICAN SAMOA
Samory in full Samory Touré
includes MOUNT WILSON OBSERVATOR Y, northeast of PASADENA. The moun-
tains are largely within the Angeles National Forest.
San Jacinto
San Martín
Sancho IV known as Sancho the Brave (b. 1257—d. April 25, 1295,
Toledo, Castile) King of Castile and Leon (1284–95). The second son of
Afonso X, he won the backing of nobles and military orders in his effort
to gain recognition as heir, and he usurped the throne on his father’s death.
Sancho defeated an invasion of Andalusia by the king of Fès (1290) and
won the support of Aragon by marrying his son to the daughter of JAMES
II. He depended greatly on his warrior-queen, María de Molina (d. 1321).
sand Mineral, rock, or soil particles that are 0.0008–0.08 in. (0.02–2
mm) in diameter. Most rock-forming minerals are found in sand, but
QUARTZ is by far the most common. Most sands also contain a small quan-
tity of FELDSPAR, as well as white MICA. All sands contain small quantities
of heavy rock-forming minerals, including garnet, tourmaline, zircon,
rutile, topaz, pyroxenes, and amphiboles. In the pottery and glassmaking
industries very pure quartz sands are used as a source of silica. Similar
sands are used for lining the hearths of steel furnaces. Molds used in
foundries for casting metal are made of sand with a clay binder. Quartz
and garnet sands are used extensively as abrasives. Among ordinary
sand’s many uses, it is a basic ingredient of mortar, cement, and concrete.
See also TAR SAND.
Sand,
Sangallo the Younger, Antonio da See Antonio DA SANGALLO THE
YOUNGER
Sanger, Frederick (b. Aug. 13, 1918, Rendcombe, Gloucestershire,
Eng.) British biochemist. Educated at the University of Cambridge, he
thereafter worked principally at the Medical Research Council in Cam-
bridge (1951–83). He spent 10 years elucidating the structure of the insu-
lin molecule, determining the exact order of all its amino acids by 1955.
His techniques for determining the order in which amino acids are linked
in proteins made it possible to discover the structure of many other com-
plex proteins. In 1958 he won a Nobel Prize for his work. In 1980 Sanger
became the fourth person ever to be awarded a second Nobel Prize, which
he shared with PAUL BERG and Walter Gilbert (b. 1932), for determining the
sequences of nucleotides in the DNA molecule of a small virus.
Sanger, Margaret orig. Margaret Higgins (b. Sept. 14, 1879,
sangha
yardage. He holds records for the most games with 150 yd or more rush-
ing (25), the most 100-yd games in a season (14), and the most touch-
down runs of 50 or more yards (15). A runner with exceptional speed and
balance, Sanders was known for his array of jukes and spins that left
defenders grasping at air.
Sanders, Otto Liman von See Otto LIMAN VON SANDERS
sandstone
Sandwich, John Montagu, 4th earl of (b. Nov. 13, 1718—d.
ering of an urban culture and a commercial economy and encouraged
improvements to roads and communications.
sannyasi
Santa Isabel See MALABO
Santander
São Paulo
mercial centre, with Otaru, on the Sea of JAPAN (East Sea), as its port.
Chief industries are lumbering, printing, and publishing. A popular cen-
tre for skiing and winter sports, it was the site of the 1972 Winter OLYM-
PIC GAMES. The annual Snow Festival features giant sculptures carved from
packed snow. It is the site of two universities.
sapsucker Either of two species of North American WOODPECKERS that
drill holes in neat, close rows to
obtain sap and insects. The yellow-
bellied sapsucker (Sphyrapicus var-
ius), about 8 in. (20 cm) long, is one
the few migratory species of
woodpecker, breeding in northern
regions and southern mountains and
migrating as far as the West Indies
and Central America. Both sexes
have bold head markings. William-
son’s
sapsucker
thyroideus),
which lives in high pine forests of
the western U.S.,
is uncommon
throughout its range.
Íaqq)rah
Sakkara
Sardinia Italian Sardegna
Saro-Wiwa
S)s)nian dynasty or S)ss)nian
Satnami sect
Sa!)d
saurischian
Savonarola
Sax, Adolphe orig. Antoine-Joseph Sax (b. Nov. 6, 1814,
Saxe, (Hermann-) Maurice, count de (b. Oct. 28, 1696, Goslar,
Saxony—d. Nov. 30, 1750, Chambord, France) German-born French gen-
eral. The illegitimate son of Frederick Augustus I of Saxony, he served
under EUGENE OF SAVOY in Flanders and was made count of Saxony (Saxe)
in 1711. He commanded a German regiment in the French service (1719)
and made innovations in military training, especially in musketry. He
served with distinction in the French army against his half brother AUGUS-
TUS III in the War of the POLISH SUCCESSION and was made a general (1734).
He successfully led French forces in the War of the AUSTRIAN SUCCESSION,
capturing Prague (1741) and invading the Austrian Netherlands. There he
won the Battle of Fontenoy (1745) and captured Brussels and Antwerp
(1746). Appointed marshal general of France by LOUIS XV, Saxe led the
successful invasion of Holland in 1747.
Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, House of See House of WINDSOR
saxifrage
Sazonov
TIC SURGER Y.
scarab
ground. See also RAYLEIGH SCATTERING.
Schacht
scherzo
schizophrenia
Schleswig-Holstein
schnauzer
Schopenhauer
Schumacher
Schuyler
leper colony. In 1952 he received the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts on
behalf of “the Brotherhood of Nations.” Two years before his death, his
hospital and leper colony were serving 500 patients. His philosophical
books discuss his famous principle of “reverence for life.”
Schwitters
scirocco See SIROCCO
scissors Cutting instrument or tool consisting of a pair of opposed metal
blades that meet and cut when the handles at their ends are brought
together. Modern scissors are of two types: the more usual pivoted blades
have a rivet or screw connection between the cutting ends and the handle
ends; spring shears have a C-shaped spring connection at the handle ends.
SCLC See SOUTHERN CHRISTIAN LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE
scleroderma
1706 I
Scotland (cid:2) Scott
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Scott, Sir Walter, 1st Baronet (b. Aug. 15, 1771, Edinburgh,
JONATHAN SWIFT, 19 vol.
Sir Walter Scott, detail of an oil paint-
ing by Sir Edwin Henry Landseer,
1824; in the National Portrait Gallery,
London
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY,
LONDON
Scriabin
Scotts Bluff National Monument National monument, western
Nebraska, U.S. Established in 1919, it has an area of 5 sq mi (13 sq km).
Its focus is a large bluff that rises 800 ft (244 m) above the NORTH PLATTE
RIVER and was a prominent landmark on the OREGON TRAIL. A museum at
the base of the bluff highlights the history of the pioneer travelers.
Scottsboro case U.S. civil-rights controversy. In April 1931, in Scotts-
boro, Ala., nine African American youths were charged with the rape of
two white women. Despite testimony by doctors that no rape had
occurred, the all-white jury convicted them and sentenced all but the
youngest to death. In 1932, following public outcry, the U.S. Supreme
Court overturned the convictions on the grounds that the defendants had
not received adequate legal counsel. Alabama retried and convicted one
of the youths; this conviction too was overturned by the Supreme Court
on the grounds that African Americans had been systematically excluded
from the state’s juries. Alabama retried and reconvicted the defendants
individually, but the state yielded to public pressure and freed or paroled
all but one, who later escaped.
Scotus, John Duns See John DUNS SCOTUS
scouting Activities of various national and worldwide organizations for
youth aimed at developing character, citizenship, and individual skills.
Scouting began when ROBERT S. BADEN-POWELL published Scouting for Boys
(1908), in which he described the games and contests he used to train
cavalry troops in scouting, envisioning small groups of boys who would
learn tracking, reconnaissance, mapping, and other outdoor skills under a
peer leader. The Boy Scouts, as established by Baden-Powell, was for
boys 11–15 years old. The concept became so popular that separate orga-
nizations for girls (Girl Guides, or Girl Scouts, 1910) and for younger
boys (Wolf Cubs, or Cub Scouts, 1916) and older boys (Explorers) were
also formed.
Scrabble Game in which two to four players compete in forming words
with lettered wooden tiles on a 225-square board. Words spelled out by
letters on the tiles interlock like words in a crossword puzzle. Words are
Scribe
Scythian art
extruded to scrape algae and other
food from rocks. Some species exca-
vate hiding places in coral, rock, or
even steel. Roe of some species is
eaten in certain countries.
Seaborg
sea parrot See PUFFIN
sea scorpion See SCULPIN
ELEPHANT SEAL, HARBOUR SEAL, HARP SEAL, and LEOPARD SEAL. The eared seals (family
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Sealyham terrier (cid:2) season
The primary cause of Earth’s seasons is the change in the amount of sunlight reach-
ing the surface at various latitudes over the course of a year. Because Earth is tilted
on its axis with respect to the plane of its orbit around the Sun, different parts of its
surface are in direct (overhead) sunlight at different times of the year.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
begins on the winter SOLSTICE, December 21 or 22; spring on the vernal
EQUINOX, March 20 or 21; summer on the summer solstice, June 21 or 22;
and fall (autumn) on the autumnal equinox, September 22 or 23. In the
Southern Hemisphere, the dates of onset of summer and winter are
reversed, as are those of spring and fall.
seasonal affective disorder (SAD) Cyclical DEPRESSION occurring
Seastrom, Victor See Victor SJÖSTRÖM
SEATO See SOUTHEAST ASIA TREATY ORGANIZATION
sebaceous gland
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) U.S. regulatory
NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE, the LONDON STOCK EXCHANGE, and the TOKYO
Security Council, United Nations See UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL
Sedan
to increased opposition to the government. In 1870 a new constitution
establishing a quasi-parliamentary regime was widely approved, but
France’s defeat at the Battle of SEDAN in the FRANCO-PRUSSIAN WAR was
followed by an uprising in Paris on Sept. 4, 1870. This resulted in the
overthrow of the government, the abdication of Napoleon III, and the end
of the Second Empire.
Second Empire style See BEAUX-ARTS STYLE
Second International or Socialist International (1889–1914)
sedimentary facies
Sefer ha-zohar
seismic sea wave See TSUNAMI
seismic
the last, the empire was at its height. Resistance to the power and spread
of Hellenistic culture soon began to manifest itself in the Asian lands.
Antiochus III’s encounter with the Romans signaled decline, especially
after the defeat of 190. The decline accelerated after the death of Antio-
chus IV (r. 175–164), who lost JUDAEA to the MACCABEES. The efforts of
Demetrius I and Antiochus VII could not forestall the dynasty’s inevi-
table end at the hands of the Roman POMPEY THE GREAT in 64 BC.
Seleucus I Nicator
Sellers, Peter orig. Richard Henry Sellers (b. Sept. 8, 1925,
Selye
Seminole
increased the number of senators to 900. AUGUSTUS dropped the number
to 300 and reduced the Senate’s power, while giving it new judicial and
legislative functions. The number later increased to about 2,000; many
were provincials, the most important being the great landowners. The
Senate’s power faded until it disappeared from the historical record in the
6th century AD.
Sendak, Maurice (Bernard) (b. June 10, 1928, New York, N.Y.,
U.S.) U.S. artist and writer. Sendak studied at the Art Students League.
He illustrated more than 80 children’s books by other writers before writ-
ing one himself. His Kenny’s Window (1956) was followed by the inno-
vative trilogy Where the Wild Things Are (1963), In the Night Kitchen
(1970), and Outside over There (1981). He collaborated with Carole King
on the musical Really Rosie (1978) and designed stage productions of The
Magic Flute (1980) and The Nutcracker (1983).
Sendero Luminoso See SHINING PATH
Seneca
Sennacherib
embowelment was favoured because it was slow and painful and therefore
demonstrated courage, self-control, and strong resolve. Voluntary seppuku
was performed to avoid the dishonour of capture, show loyalty to one’s
lord by following him into death, protest against some policy of a supe-
rior, or atone for failure. Obligatory seppuku was a method of capital
punishment for a samurai, who would be beheaded by a second once he
had made an initial stab wound himself. Obligatory seppuku was abol-
ished in 1873, but voluntary seppuku continued to occur. Notable 20th-
century examples included those of army officer NOGI MARESUKE and writer
septicemia
(1918–41) and communist Yugoslavia (1945–91). With the independence
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1992, a Bosnian form of the language was
recognized of necessity. Vocabulary and pronunciation differences exist
among the three but form no real barrier to communication. The Croats
and Bosnians use the Roman, or Latin, alphabet; the Serbs and Montene-
grins of present-day Serbia and Montenegro use Cyrillic. Most Bosnians,
Serbs, and Croats insist that their language is distinct from the others,
and, perhaps, from a political perspective this is understandable; but most
linguists consider Serbian, Croatian, and Bosnian a single language,
which has historically been called Serbo-Croatian.
Serbs, Croats
and Montenegro is mountainous, with the
Dinaric Alps in the west and the BALKAN
MOUNTAINS in the east. Rivers include the
DANUBE, Ibar, MORAVA, TIMIÊ, and TISZA. The
country has oil, gas, coal, copper, lead, zinc,
and gold deposits. Its industries include machine building, metallurgy,
mining, electronics, and petroleum products, while its agricultural products
include corn, wheat, potatoes, and fruit. The country is a federation with a
president and a unicameral legislature, but most power resides with the
governments of the two republics. The Kingdom of SERBS, CROATS, AND SLOV-
ENES was created after the collapse of AUSTRIA-HUNGAR Y at the end of World
War I. The country signed treaties with Czechoslovakia and Romania in
1920–21, marking the beginning of the LITTLE ENTENTE. In 1929 an absolute
monarchy was established, the country’s name was changed to Yugoslavia,
and it was divided without regard to ethnic boundaries. Axis powers
invaded Yugoslavia in 1941, and German, Italian, Hungarian, and Bulgar-
ian troops occupied it for the rest of World War II. In 1945 the Federal Peo-
ple’s Republic of Yugoslavia was established; it included the republics of
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA, CROATIA, MACEDONIA, Montenegro, Serbia, and SLO-
synonymous, are often used interchangeably. The serial method was
worked out by ARNOLD SCHOENBERG in the years 1916–23, though another
serial method was being devised simultaneously by Josef Matthias Hauer.
To Schoenberg, it represented the culmination of the growth of CHROMATI-
CISM in the late 19th and early 20th century. In an attempt to erase the
system of TONALITY, which he regarded as outworn but which frequently
asserted itself even in the music of composers who desired to transcend
it, Schoenberg’s original method stipulated (among several other require-
ments) that no note could be repeated before all 11 other notes of the
chromatic scale had been used. Serialism, a broader term than 12-tone
music, can be applied to the use of fewer than 12 tones. “Total serialism,”
a concept that arose in the late 1940s, attempts to organize not only the
12 pitches but also other elements such as rhythm, dynamics, register, and
instrumentation into ordered sets.
serigraphy See SILKSCREEN
serine
MENT.
logic and NUMBER THEOR Y.
SETI in full search for extraterrestrial intelligence Ongoing
also DRAKE EQUATION.
Seton
Seton
Seventh-day Adventist See ADVENTIST
Severn
Sewall
SEXUALISM.
sexually transmitted disease (STD) Disease transmitted prima-
rily by direct sexual contact. STDs usually affect the REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
and URINAR Y system but can be spread to the mouth or rectum by oral or
anal sex. In later stages they may attack other organs and systems. The
best-known are SYPHILIS, GONORRHEA, AIDS, and HERPES SIMPLEX. Yeast infec-
tions (see CANDIDA) produce a thick, whitish vaginal discharge and genital
irritation and itch in women and sometimes irritation of the penis in men.
Crab louse infestation (see LOUSE, HUMAN) can also be considered an STD.
The incidence of STDs has been affected by such factors as ANTIBIOTICs,
BIRTH-CONTROL methods, and changes in sexual behaviour. See also CHLAMY-
DIA; HEPATITIS; PELVIC INFLAMMATOR Y DISEASE; WART.
Seybouse River
SGML in full Standard Generalized Markup Language
Shaanxi
Shah Jah)n
shakuhachi
Shankara
sharksucker See REMORA
Sharm al-Sheikh See Cape NAÍR0Nq
Sharon
Shawnee
DOG, SHETLAND SHEEPDOG.
sheikh
sheltie See SHETLAND SHEEPDOG
Shen-hsi See SHAANXI
sheng
1738 I
Sheridan (cid:2) Shetland Islands
joined ULYSSES S. GRANT to help secure Union victories in the PETERSBURG
CAMPAIGN. After the war he became general of the army (1883).
Sheridan, Richard Brinsley (Butler) (baptized Nov. 4, 1751, Dub-
the SHERMAN ANTITRUST ACT and the
Sherman, Roger (b. April 19,
John Sherman
1721, Newton, Mass.—d. July 23,
1793, New Haven, Conn., U.S.)
American jurist and politician. Active in trade and law in Connecticut, he
served as judge of the superior court (1766–85) and mayor of New Haven
(1784–93). A delegate to the Continental Congress, he signed the DECLA-
COURTESY OF THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, WASHINGTON,
RATION OF INDEPENDENCE and helped draft the ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION. At
the CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION, he proposed a compromise on congres-
sional representation that combined facets of the two opposing plans by
the large and small states. The result, called the Connecticut (or Great)
Compromise, which was incorporated into the Constitution, provided for
a bicameral legislature with representation based on population in one
house (House of Representatives) and on the principle of equality in the
other (Senate).
Sherman, William Tecumseh (b. Feb. 8, 1820, Lancaster, Ohio,
U.S.—d. Feb. 14, 1891, New York, N.Y.) U.S. army general. A brother
of JOHN SHERMAN, he graduated from West Point, served in Florida and
California, then resigned his commission in 1853 to pursue a banking
career. He rejoined the Union army when the American Civil War broke
out. He fought in the Battle of Bull Run, then served under ULYSSES S.
GRANT at Shiloh and was promoted to major general. With Grant he helped
win the VICKSBURG CAMPAIGN and the Battle of CHATTANOOGA. As commander
of the division of the Mississippi, he assembled 100,000 troops for the
invasion of Georgia (1864). After engagements with Confederate troops
under JOSEPH JOHNSTON, he captured and burned Atlanta and began his
devastating March to the Sea to capture Savannah, leaving a trail of near-
total destruction. In 1865 he marched north, destroying Confederate rail-
roads and sources of supply in North and South Carolina. He accepted the
surrender of Johnston’s army on April 26. Promoted to general, he suc-
ceeded Grant as commander of the army (1869–84). Often credited with
the saying “War is hell,” he was a major architect of modern TOTAL WAR.
Sherman Antitrust Act (1890) First U.S. legislation enacted to curb
concentrations of power that restrict trade and reduce economic compe-
tition. Proposed by Sen. JOHN SHERMAN, it made illegal all attempts to
monopolize any part of trade or commerce in the U.S. Initially used
against trade unions, it was more widely enforced under Pres. THEODORE
ROOSEVELT. In 1914 Congress strengthened the act with the Clayton Anti-
trust Act and the formation of the Federal Trade Commission. In 1920 the
U.S. Supreme Court relaxed antitrust regulations so that only “unreason-
able” restraint of trade through acquisitions, mergers, and predatory pric-
ing constituted a violation. Later cases reinforced the prohibition against
MONOPOLY control, including the 1984 break-up of AT&T. See also ANTITRUST
Sherpa Any member of a mountain-dwelling people of Nepal and of
Sikkim state, India. Sherpas are of Tibetan culture and descent and speak
a Tibetan dialect. They make a living spinning and weaving wool, along
with farming and cattle breeding. They have won international renown as
porters in the high Himalayas. They number about 120,000.
Sherrington, Sir Charles Scott (b. Nov. 27, 1857, London,
Shetland Islands or Zetland Islands Island group (pop., 2001:
21,988), Scotland. The Shetlands comprise some 100 islands located 130
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Shevardnadze
Historically, they were united in a single tribal state headed by a divine
king whose physical and ritual well-being was held to ensure the state’s
prosperity. In addition to several classes of royalty, the Shilluk tradition-
ally were divided into royal retainers, commoners, and slaves. See also
NILOT.
Shiloh
Shlr)z
BRIG, CLIPPER SHIP, CORVETTE, DHOW, FRIGATE, JUNK, LONGSHIP, OCEAN LINER, SCHOO-
NER, YACHT.
powered BATTLESHIP.
mythology. He is both the destroyer and the restorer, the great ascetic and
the symbol of sensuality, the benevolent herdsman of souls and the wrath-
ful avenger. His female consort is known under various manifestations,
including PARVATI, DURGA, and KALI. InS HAIVISM he is worshiped as the para-
mount lord.
Shivaji
sh§ji
probably acquired horses by 1680 and adopted much of PLAINS INDIAN cul-
ture; they hunted buffalo, used TEPEEs and skin clothing, and warred with
other tribes. The Shoshone are closely related to the Ute, Paiute, Gosiute,
and Bannock. After splitting from the Wind River group, the COMANCHE
moved south. The Shoshone number about 10,000.
Shoshone
Shrewsbury, Charles Talbot, duke and 12th earl of (b. July
FAIR Y SHRIMP.
Shropshire
Shugen-d§
include NOVOSIBIRSK, OMSK, KRASNOYARSK, and IRKUTSK.
Siberut
She acted with her father’s traveling company and married actor William
Siddons in 1773. Her performance as Isabella in Fatal Marriage at the
DRUR Y LANE THEATRE in 1782 was highly successful; she was instantly
acclaimed as the leading tragedienne of the time. Siddons played Shakes-
pearean parts, notably Lady Macbeth, from 1785 until she retired in 1812.
She was the subject of well-known portraits by THOMAS GAINSBOROUGH and
JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
Siena
Sigismund
sikhara or shikhara
including QUARTZ, tridymite, cristobalite, coesite, stishovite, melanophlog-
ite, lechatelierite, and chalcedony. Various kinds of silica minerals have
been produced synthetically.
silicate mineral Any of a large group of silicon-oxygen compounds
that are widely distributed throughout much of the solar system. The sili-
cates make up about 95% of the Earth’s crust and upper mantle, occur-
ring as the major constituents of most IGNEOUS ROCKs and in appreciable
quantities in SEDIMENTAR Y and METAMORPHIC rocks. They also are important
constituents of lunar samples, meteorites, and most asteroids. In addition,
planetary probes have detected them on the surfaces of Mercury, Venus,
and Mars. Of the approximately 600 known silicate minerals, only the
FELDSPARs, AMPHIBOLEs, PYROXENEs, MICAs, OLIVINEs, FELDSPATHOIDs, and ZEOLITEs are
siliceous rock
Sillanpää
BIMETALLISM.
Silvers, Phil orig. Philip Silversmith (b. May 11, 1912, Brooklyn,
GEORGIAN BAY and Lake ONTARIO
north of TORONTO, Lake Simcoe is
287 sq mi (743 sq km) in area.
Numerous small streams and the
Trent Canal feed the lake, which is
30 mi (48 km) long and contains sev-
eral islands; the largest, Georgina, is
an Indian reserve. The lake is a popu-
lar summer vacation area.
Simenon
comprising The Grass (1958), The Flanders Road (1960), The Palace
(1962), and History (1967), with its recurring characters and events. His
other novels include The Wind (1957), Triptych (1973), The Acacia (1989),
and The Trolley (2001). He received the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1985.
Simon
simulation, computer Use of a computer-generated system to rep-
resent the dynamic responses and behaviour of a real or proposed system.
A mathematical description of a system is developed as a computer pro-
gram that uses equations to represent the functional relationships within
the system. When the program is run, the resulting mathematical dynam-
ics form an analog, usually represented graphically, of the behaviour of
the modeled system. Variables in the program can be adjusted to simu-
late varying conditions in the system. Computer simulations are used to
study the behaviour of objects or systems that cannot be easily or safely
tested in real life, such as weather patterns or a nuclear blast. Simpler
simulations performed by PERSONAL COMPUTERs are business models and geo-
metric models. See also SCIENTIFIC VISUALIZATION.
simultaneous equations See SYSTEM OF EQUATIONS
controlled by investor James Henry Ting. Still one of the world’s largest
sewing-machine manufacturers,
the company declared bankruptcy in
1999 and was reorganized as Singer NV in 2000.
Singitic
Singer, Isaac Bashevis Yiddish Yitskhok Bashevis Zinger (b.
POLO BRIDGE INCIDENT; NANJING MASSACRE; TONGHAK UPRISING.
Sino-Tibetan
Siqueiros
sitar
Sjahrir
53) and television (1951–71). Noted for his broad humour and warm per-
sonality, Skelton developed characters such as the Mean Widdle Kid,
Clem Kadiddlehopper, and Freddie the Freeloader.
skene
Skelton, Red orig. Richard Bernard Skelton (b. July 18, 1913,
species are 26 in. (66 cm) long, but most are under 8 in. (20 cm). Some
have small or no limbs and sunken eardrums. Most are ground-dwellers
or burrowers; some are arboreal or semiaquatic. Skinks eat insects and
other small invertebrates; large species are herbivorous. Some species lay
eggs; others bear live young.
Skopje
known is KAPOSI SARCOMA.
1764 I
skull (cid:2) slag
other birds to disgorge food; they nest near penguins, petrels, murres, and
terns, stealing their eggs and young. They also eat lemmings and carrion.
skull Skeletal framework of the head. With the exception of the lower
JAW, its bones meet in immovable joints (sutures) to form a unit that
encloses and protects the BRAIN and SENSE organs and gives shape to the
FACE. The cranium, the upper part enclosing the brain, comprising the
frontal, parietal, occipital, temporal, sphenoid, and ethmoid bones, is
globular and relatively large compared to the facial portion. Its base has
an opening through which the SPINAL CORD connects to the brain. The skull
sits on the top vertebra (atlas), which permits back-and-forth motion. For
side-to-side motion, the atlas turns on the next vertebra (axis). See also
CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS, FONTANEL.
Front and side views of the human skull.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
E.R. DEGGINGER
Striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis).
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Seven-man freefall hookup.
GUY SAUVAGE—AGENCE VANDYSTADT/PHOTO RESEARCHERS
slalom
were traded in the Caribbean for molasses, which was made into rum in
the American colonies and traded back to Africa for more slaves.
slavery Forced labour for little or no pay under the threat of violence.
Slavery has existed on nearly every continent, including Asia, Europe,
Africa, and the Americas, and throughout most of recorded history. The
ancient Greeks and Romans accepted the institution of slavery, as did the
Mayas, Incas, Aztecs, and Chinese. Until European involvement in the
trade, however, slavery was a private and domestic institution. Beginning
in the 16th century, a more public and “racially” based type of slavery
was established when Europeans began importing slaves from Africa to
the New World (see SLAVE TRADE). An estimated 11 million people were
taken from Africa during the transatlantic slave trade. By the mid-19th
century the slave population in the U.S. had risen to more than four mil-
lion, although slave imports had been banned from 1809. Most of the
Africans sent to the United States worked on cotton or rice plantations in
the South, their status governed by SLAVE CODES. Almost 40 percent of cap-
tives transported from Africa to the Americas were taken to Brazil, where
harsh conditions required the constant replenishing of slaves. Following
the rise of ABOLITIONISM, Britain outlawed slavery in its colonies in 1833,
and France did the same in 1848. During the American Civil War, slavery
was abolished in the Confederacy by the EMANCIPATION PROCLAMATION
(1863), which was decreed by Pres. Abraham Lincoln. Brazil was the last
to abolish slavery, doing so in 1888. Official policy notwithstanding, sla-
very continues to exist in many parts of the world. Many contemporary
slaves are women and children forced into prostitution or working at hard
labour or in sweatshops. Debt bondage is common, affecting millions of
people, and slaves are often traded for material goods. See also DRED SCOTT
DECISION; FUGITIVE SLAVE ACTS; SERFDOM; UNDERGROUND RAILROAD.
Slavic
Slovak
Sloan, Alfred P(ritchard), Jr.
Slovaks settled there around the 6th century. It became part of Great
MORAVIA in the 9th century but was conquered by the MAGYARS c. 907. It
remained in the kingdom of Hungary until the end of World War I, when
the Slovaks joined the Czechs to form the new state of Czechoslovakia
in 1918. In 1938 Slovakia was declared an autonomous unit within
Czechoslovakia; it was nominally independent under German protection
from 1939 to 1945. After the expulsion of the Germans, Slovakia joined
a reconstituted Czechoslovakia, which came under Soviet domination in
1948. The fall of the communist regime in 1989 led to a revival of inter-
est in autonomy, and Slovakia became an independent nation in 1993. It
joined both NATO and the European Union in 2004.
Slovene
ods outside the body (e.g., in bedding). EDWARD JENNER developed a VACCINE
from cowpox. The World Health Organization’s eradication project
reduced smallpox deaths from two million in 1967 to zero in 1977–80.
The virus now exists only in laboratories; in some countries it may be
under development for purposes of BIOLOGICAL WARFARE.
Smalls, Robert (b. April 5, 1839, Beaufort, S.C., U.S.—d. Feb. 22,
1915, Beaufort) U.S. naval hero.
Born to plantation slaves, he was
taken to Charleston, S.C., where he
worked as a hotel waiter. In the
American Civil War
he was
impressed into the Confederate navy
to serve on the armed frigate Planter.
In 1862 he and 12 other slaves seized
control of the ship in Charleston har-
bour and turned it over to the Union
navy. He served as the ship’s pilot
and became its captain in 1863. After
the war he served in the U.S. House
of Representatives (1875–79, 1881–
also METALLURGY; MINERAL PROCESSING.
Smetana
Smallwood,
Joseph Roberts Smallwood
orig.
1770 I
Smith, Bessie (cid:2) Smith, Joseph
Smith, Frederick Edwin See Earl of BIRKENHEAD
the BRONTË SISTERS, CHARLES DARWIN, WILLIAM THACKERAY, ELIZABETH BARRETT
BROWNING, WILKIE COLLINS, MATTHEW ARNOLD, HARRIET MARTINEAU, and
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Joseph Smith, detail from an oil paint-
ing by an unknown artist; in the Com-
munity of Christ Temple and
Auditorium complex, Independence,
Missouri.
John Smith, engraving by Simon van
de Passe, 1616
COURTESY OF THE TRUSTEES OF THE BRITISH MUSEUM;
PHOTOGRAPH, J.R. FREEMAN & CO. LTD.
COURTESY OF THE COMMUNITY OF CHRIST,
INDEPENDENCE, MISSOURI
Smith, Kate orig. Kathryn Elizabeth Smith (b. May 1, 1909,
Greenville, Va., U.S.—d. June 17, 1986, Raleigh, N.C.) U.S. singer, long
known as the “First Lady of Radio.” Smith studied nursing before mov-
ing to New York City, where she won a Broadway role as an overweight
girl who was the butt of jokes. In 1931 she began her immensely popular
radio show Kate Smith Sings, which ran for 16 years; her theme song,
“When the Moon Comes over the Mountain,” became familiar to mil-
lions. In 1938 she created the news and gossip program Kate Smith Speaks
and introduced IRVING BERLIN’s song “God Bless America.” She hosted sev-
eral television shows in the 1950s. In 1982 she was awarded the U.S.
Medal of Freedom.
Smith, Dame Maggie orig. Margaret Natalie Smith (b. Dec.
Smith, Margaret Chase orig. Margaret Madeline Chase (b.
Smith, Red orig. Walter Wellesley Smith (b. Sept. 25, 1905,
Smith, Stevie orig. Florence Margaret Smith (b. Sept. 20, 1902,
Smith, Kate (cid:2) smithing
WEST PASSAGE.
smithing Fabrication and repair of metal objects by hot and cold FORG-
ING on an ANVIL or with a power hammer or by WELDING and other means.
Blacksmiths traditionally worked with IRON (anciently known as “black
metal”), making agricultural and other tools, fashioning hardware (e.g.,
hooks, hinges, handles) for the farm, the home, and industry, and shoe-
ing horses. The term smithing is also applied to work with precious met-
als (gold, silver) as well as other metals (e.g., tin, including tinplate, and
steel).
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Smithsonian Institution U.S. research institution. Enabled by the
bequest of the English chemist James Smithson (1765–1829), it was estab-
lished in Washington, D.C., by an 1846 act of Congress. The Smithsonian
administers numerous bureaus, including the Freer Gallery of Art, the
John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, the National Air and
Space Museum, the National Gallery of Art, the National Museum of
History and Technology, the National Museum of Natural History, the
National Zoological Park, and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observa-
tory.
smog Polluted air over a community. The term, a combination of
“smoke” and “fog,” was popularized in the early 20th century and now
commonly refers to the pall of automotive or industrial origin that lies
over many cities. Sulfurous smog results from the use of sulfur-bearing
fossil fuels, particularly coal, and is aggravated by dampness. Photo-
chemical smog requires neither smoke nor fog. Nitrogen oxides and
hydrocarbon vapours emitted from automobiles and other sources undergo
reactions in the presence of sunlight that produce a light brownish col-
oration of the atmosphere, reduced visibility, plant damage, irritation of
the eyes, and respiratory distress.
smoking Breathing the fumes of burning plant material, especially
tobacco, from a cigarette, cigar, or pipe. Despite social and medical argu-
ments against tobacco use, smoking is widely practiced around the world.
NICOTINE is an ALKALOID in tobacco that is addictive and can have both
stimulating and tranquilizing psychoactive effects. The tar (residue) and
gases produced by burning tobacco have many negative health effects.
They include LUNG CANCER, PANCREATIC CANCER, and LAR YNGEAL CANCER; HEART
DISEASE and STROKE; and EMPHYSEMA and chronic BRONCHITIS. Smoking also
increases other health-related risk factors (see ASBESTOSIS). A nonsmoker
who breathes secondhand smoke (such as the smoke from a lit cigarette)
is at an increased risk of the same diseases that affect smokers. Second-
hand smoke also increases the risk of SUDDEN INFANT DEATH SYNDROME. Doctor-
run programs, along with nicotine patches and gums that provide
diminishing doses of nicotine, are among the aids available to help those
who wish to quit smoking. Hypnosis, acupuncture, herbal remedies, and
other approaches are also widely advertised as ways to quit smoking.
Smoking has been greatly reduced in the health-conscious West even as
it rises in many less-developed countries.
Smoky Mountains See GREAT SMOKY MTNS.
smoky quartz Common, coarse-grained variety of QUARTZ that ranges
in colour from nearly black through smoky brown. No distinct boundary
exists between smoky and colourless quartz. Its abundance causes it to be
worth considerably less than either AMETHYST or CITRINE. Heating bleaches
the stone, the colour sometimes passing through yellow; these yellow
pieces are often sold as citrine.
Smolensk
Smythe
Snorri Sturluson
Sobat
snowshoe hare or snowshoe rabbit or varying hare North-
Snyder, Gary (Sherman) (b.
1776 I
Social Gospel (cid:2) socialism
Germany under OTTO VON BISMARCK: HEALTH INSURANCE in 1883, WORKERS’
INSURANCE; WELFARE.
include CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY, ECONOMICS, POLITICAL SCIENCE, SOCIOLOGY, CRIMI-
NOLOGY, and SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY. Comparative law and comparative religion
(the comparative study of the legal systems and religions of different
nations and cultures) are also sometimes regarded as social sciences.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
also SOCIAL SECURITY ACT; UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE; WELFARE; WORKERS’ COMPEN-
SATION.
Social War or Italic War or Marsic War (90–89 BC) Rebellion
waged by ancient Rome’s Italian allies (Latin, socii). The allies in cen-
tral and southern Italy had aided Rome in its wars, but they were denied
the privileges of Roman citizenship. The people of central Italy’s hills—
the Marsi in the north and the Samnites in the south—organized a con-
federacy and began an uprising for independence, winning victories over
Roman armies in the north and south. After Rome granted citizenship to
those who had not revolted and those who would immediately lay down
their arms, Italian interest in the struggle declined. SULLA defeated the
weakened rebels in the south, and legislation was passed to unify Italy
south of the Po River.
social welfare See WELFARE
TARIANISM, SOCIAL DEMOCRACY.
Socialist International See SECOND INTERNATIONAL
Socialist Realism Officially sanctioned theory and method of artistic
and literary composition in the Soviet Union from 1932 to the mid-1980s.
Following the tradition of 19th-century Russian REALISM, Socialist Realism
purported to serve as an objective mirror of life. Instead of critiquing
society, however, it took as its primary theme the struggle to build social-
ism and a classless society and called for the didactic use of art to develop
social consciousness. Artists were expected to take a positive view of
socialist society and to keep in mind its historical relevance, requisites
that seldom coincided with their real experiences and frequently under-
mined the artistic credibility of their works.
Socialist Revolutionary Party (SR) Russian political party. The
ideological heir to the 19th-century NARODNIKs (Populists), it was founded
in 1901 by agrarian socialists and appealed mainly to the peasantry. It
was the principal alternative to the RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC WORKERS’
PARTY in the early 20th century. It relied on terrorist tactics and carried out
hundreds of political assassinations. By 1917 it was Russia’s largest
socialist group; its members included ALEKSANDR KERENSKY, VIKTOR CHERNOV,
and CATHERINE BRESHKOVSKY. The party split after the RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF
1917, and its radical wing joined the BOLSHEVIK government. It was sup-
pressed by VLADIMIR LENIN after the RUSSIAN CIVIL WAR.
Société Générale
(including BICARBONATE OF SODA, CAUSTIC SODA, sodium NITRATE [Chile SALTPE-
TRE], and SODIUM CHLORIDE), has VALENCE 1. Sodium CARBONATE, one of the four
facturing CHLORINE, CAUSTIC SODA, sodium CARBONATE, BICARBONATE OF SODA,
SOAP, and chlorine BLEACH, as well as in ceramic glazes, metallurgy, food
preservation, curing of hides, road de-icing, water softening, photogra-
phy, and many consumer products, including mineral waters, mouth-
washes, and table salt itself. It is mined, extracted from SEAWATER, and
obtained from dry salt lakes called pans. See also HALITE.
Sodom and Gomorrah
FUJIWARA FAMILY. See also NARA PERIOD.
Sogdiana
CENTAUR OBJECT, COMET, KUIPER BELT, METEORITE, and OORT CLOUD) interplanetary
dust and gas under the Sun’s gravitational control. Another component of
the solar system is the SOLAR WIND. The Sun contains more than 99% of
the mass of the solar system; most of the rest is distributed among the
nine planets, with JUPITER containing about 70%. According to the prevail-
ing theory, the solar system originated from the SOLAR NEBULA. See also
EARTH, MARS, MERCUR Y, NEPTUNE, PLUTO, SATURN, URANUS, VENUS.
soldering
solfeggio See SOLMIZATION
Solferino
Solon
Somalia Country, eastern Africa. Located in the HORN OF AFRICA, it
stretches from the Equator to the Red Sea. Area: 246,000 sq mi (637,000 sq
km). Population (2005 est.): 8,228,000 (excluding an estimated 400,000
Somaliland
Sonderbund
net. It consists of three quatrains, each with an independent rhyme
scheme, and ends with a rhymed couplet.
Sonni !All
dealing with the physical geography of geologic periods, rock breakdown
and buildup, and the formation of river terraces. Sorby is considered the
father of microscopical petrography and metallography.
sorcery See WITCHCRAFT AND SORCER Y
Sorel
BROWN, RAY CHARLES, SAM COOKE, and ARETHA FRANKLIN.
Sound, The See ØRESUND
sound reception See HEARING
Souphanouvong
1788 I
South African War (cid:2) South Asian arts
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
1790 I
South Australia (cid:2) South West Africa People’s Organization
styles. See also BHARATA NATYA; GANDHARA ART; MATHURA ART; MUGHAL ARCHI-
TECTURE; SITAR; TABLA; and such individual artists as SATYAJIT RAY; SALMAN
RUSHDIE; RAVI SHANKAR; RABINDRANATH TAGORE.
South China Sea See CHINA SEA
South Dakota State (pop., 2000: 754,844), north-central U.S. It cov-
ers 77,116 sq mi (199,730 sq km); its capital is PIERRE. South Dakota is
bordered on the north by North Dakota, on the east by Minnesota and
Iowa, on the south by Nebraska, and on the west by Wyoming and Mon-
tana. The state has three main regions—the eastern prairie; the central
GREAT PLAINS, which contain the BADLANDS; and the BLACK HILLS to the west.
The MISSOURI RIVER bisects it from north to south. The French explored the
area in the 18th century and sold it to the U.S. as part of the LOUISIANA
PURCHASE in 1803. The LEWIS AND CLARK EXPEDITION spent about seven weeks
there in 1804. The Dakota Territory was created in 1861, but settlement
was sparse until the Black Hills gold rush of 1875–76 swelled the popu-
lation. Intermittent wars between the Indians and immigrant whites
occurred until the massacre at WOUNDED KNEE in 1890. South Dakota
became the 40th U.S. state in 1889. Farming and related industries form
the state’s economic base. It is a leader in cattle and hog production, and
its main crops are grains. Tourism is a major industry; attractions include
Mount RUSHMORE, WIND CAVE NATIONAL PARK, Badlands National Park, and
JEWEL CAVE NATIONAL MONUMENT.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
NORTH ISLAND by COOK STRAIT, it has an
P. CHANDRA
The god Shiva in the garb of a mendi-
cant, South Indian bronze from Tiru-
vengadu, Tamil Nadu, early 11th
century; in the Thanjavur Museum and
Art Gallery, Tamil Nadu
South West Africa See NAMIBIA
South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) Party in
South West Africa (now Namibia) that advocated immediate independence
from South Africa. Founded in 1960, it used diplomacy to attain its goals
Southampton, Henry Wriothesley, 3rd earl of (b. Oct. 6,
Southampton, Thomas Wriothesley
Southey
Soyuz
1794 I
spacecraft (cid:2) Spain
Spagnuolo, Pietro See Pedro
BERRUGUETE
Spahn, Warren (Edward) (b.
April 23, 1921, Buffalo, N.Y.,
U.S.—d. Nov. 24, 2003, Broken
Arrow, Okla.) U.S. baseball pitcher.
Spahn spent most of his career with
the Boston (later Milwaukee) Braves
(1942, 1946–64). He amassed 2,583
career strikeouts, giving him the
third highest total in baseball history
when he retired. His feat of winning
20 or more games in each of 13 sea-
sons was also a record, as was his
striking out at least 100 batters each
for 17 consecutive seasons
(1947–63). His total of 363 wins
established a record for left-handers.
He was inducted into the Baseball
Hall of Fame in 1973.
ARIC and CANAR Y
SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR (1898). (See CUBA; GUAM; PHILIPPINES; PUERTO RICO.)
Soviet/Russian space station Mir, after completion in 1996. The date shown for each module is its year of launch. Docked to the
station are a Soyuz TM manned spacecraft and an unmanned Progress resupply ferry.
ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
LAUNCH VEHICLE.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Spalatin
Sparta or Lacedaemon
source of modern standard Spanish, arose in the 9th century in north-
central Spain (Old Castile) and spread to central Spain (New Castile) by the
11th century. In the late 15th century the kingdoms of Castile, León, and
Aragon merged, and Castilian became the official language of all Spain,
with CATALAN and Galician (effectively a dialect of PORTUGUESE) becoming
regional languages and Aragonese and Leonese reduced to a fraction of
their original speech areas. Latin American regional dialects are derived
from Castilian but differ from it in PHONOLOGY.
Spanish Main Northern coast of South America. The term refers to an
area that was once under Spanish control and spanned roughly between
the Isthmus of PANAMA and the delta of the ORINOCO RIVER. The term can
also refer to the Caribbean Sea and adjacent waters, especially when
referring to the period when the region was troubled by pirates.
Spanish Mission style See MISSION STYLE
Spanish Sahara See WESTERN SAHARA
Spark, Muriel (Sarah) orig. Muriel Sarah Camberg (b. Feb.
relayed from the eyes, ears, muscles, and skin. The senses may not per-
ceive gradual changes in motion and may overestimate the degree of
abrupt changes and overcompensate when motion stops. Airplane pilots
and divers also contend with apparent changes in gravitational pull, which
can lead to dangerous situations and must be overcome by training. See
also INNER EAR; PROPRIOCEPTION.
speaker See LOUDSPEAKER
Spearman, Charles E(dward)
Special Forces See GREEN BERETS
Special Olympics International sports program for people with men-
tal retardation. It provides year-round training and athletic competition in
a variety of Olympic-type summer and winter sports for participants.
Inaugurated in 1968 through the efforts of Eunice Kennedy Shriver and
the Chicago Park District, the Special Olympics was officially recognized
by the International Olympic Committee in 1988. Games are held every
two years, alternating between winter and summer sports. International
headquarters are in Washington, D.C.
special prosecutor See INDEPENDENT COUNSEL
speciation
spectrophotometry
WALKER.
A. AKERLOF and JOSEPH E. STIGLITZ.
Spender, Sir Stephen (Harold) (b. Feb. 28, 1909, London,
Spengler
Sperry, Roger (b. Aug. 20, 1913, Hartford, Conn., U.S.—d. April 17,
1994, Pasadena, Calif.) U.S. neurobiologist. He earned a doctorate in
zoology from the University of Chicago. He studied functional special-
ization in the hemispheres of the cerebral cortex, examining animals and
then humans with epilepsy in whose brains the corpus callosum had been
severed. His research showed that the left side of the brain is normally
dominant for analytical and verbal tasks and the right for spatial tasks,
music, and certain other areas. His techniques laid the groundwork for
much more specialized explorations. He shared a 1981 Nobel Prize with
DAVID HUBEL and TORSTEN WIESEL.
Spiegel, Der
mechanical spinning. The result was a series of inventions that converted
the spinning wheel into a powered, mechanized component of the INDUS-
TRIAL REVOLUTION (see DRAWING FRAME; SPINNING JENNY; WATER FRAME).
Spinoza
spirochete
Spokane
spotted fever See ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER
concerns. See also CROP DUSTER; FUNGICIDE; HERBICIDE; INSECTICIDE.
spreadsheet Computer SOFTWARE that allows the user to enter columns
and rows of numbers in a ledgerlike format. Any cell of the ledger may
contain either data or a formula that describes the value that should be
inserted therein based on the values in other cells. When a change is made
in one cell, the program recalculates the contents of all cells affected by
the change. Spreadsheets are widely used for performing business calcu-
lations on PERSONAL COMPUTERS.
Spree River
Springsteen, Bruce (Frederick Joseph) (b. Sept. 23, 1949, Free-
CASTOR-OIL PLANT, CROTON, CASSAVA, and RUBBER TREE.
Sputnik
about 35 in. (90 cm) long. Tree dwellers live in a tree hollow or nest, and
most are active year-round. Ground dwellers live in burrows, and many
become dormant in winter (hibernate) or summer (estivate). Most species
are primarily vegetarian and are fond of seeds and nuts; some eat insects
or supplement their diet with animal protein. See also CHIPMUNK; FLYING
SQUIRREL; GROUND SQUIRREL; MARMOT; PRAIRIE DOG.
squirrel monkey Any of several species (genus Saimiri, family
Cebidae) of arboreal NEW WORLD
MONKEYs, found in groups of up to
several hundred during the day in
riverside forests of Central and
South America. They eat
fruit,
insects, and small animals. They are
10–16 in. (25–40 cm) long and have
a heavy, nonprehensile, black-tipped
tail, 15–19 in. (37–47 cm) long. They
have a small white face, large eyes,
and large, usually tufted, ears. The
short, soft coat is grayish to green-
ish, with yellow or orange arms,
hands, and feet. The crown of the
common squirrel monkey (S. sci-
ureus) is olive or grayish; the red-
backed
squirrel monkey
oerstedii) has a black crown and red-
dish back.
Sraosha
GAMES.
squirrel Any of about 260 species in 50 genera (family Sciuridae) of
mostly diurnal RODENTS found almost worldwide. Many species are arbo-
real; some are terrestrial. All species have strong hind legs and a hairy
tail. They vary widely in colour and form and range in total length from
the 4-in. (10-cm) African pygmy squirrel to the giant squirrels of Asia,
Sinhalese groups has beset
the country
since the early 1980s, the Tamils demand-
ing a separate autonomous state in northern
Sri Lanka. In 2004 Sri Lanka was struck by
a tsunami that badly damaged much of the
coastline and killed tens of thousands of people.
Srinagar
stalactite and stalagmite
Staffordshire terrier See PIT BULL
TERRIER
Stalin, Joseph orig. Iosif Vissarionovich Dzhugashvili (b.
Dec. 21, 1879, Gori, Georgia, Russian Empire—d. March 5, 1953, Mos-
cow, Russia, U.S.S.R.) Soviet politician and dictator. The son of a cob-
bler, he studied at a seminary but was expelled for revolutionary activity
in 1899. He joined an underground revolutionary group and sided with
the BOLSHEVIK faction of the RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC WORKERS’ PARTY in
his rivals, including LEON TROTSKY, GRIGOR Y ZINOVYEV, LEV KAMENEV, NIKOLAY
BUKHARIN, and ALEKSEY RYKOV, and took control of Soviet politics. In 1928
he inaugurated the FIVE-YEAR PLANs that radically altered Soviet economic
and social structures and resulted in the deaths of many millions. In the
1930s he contrived to eliminate threats to his power through the PURGE TRI-
ALS and through widespread secret executions and persecution. In WORLD
WAR II he signed the GERMAN-SOVIET NONAGGRESSION PACT (1939), attacked
Finland (see RUSSO-FINNISH WAR), and annexed parts of eastern Europe to
strengthen his western frontiers. When Germany invaded Russia (1941),
Stalin took control of military operations. He allied Russia with Britain
and the U.S.; at the TEHR0N, YALTA, and POTSDAM conferences, he demon-
strated his negotiating skill. After the war he consolidated Soviet power
in eastern Europe and built up the Soviet Union as a world military power.
He continued his repressive political measures to control internal dissent;
increasingly paranoid, he was preparing to mount another purge after the
so-called DOCTORS’ PLOT when he died. Noted for bringing the Soviet Union
into world prominence, at terrible cost to his own people, he left a legacy
of repression and fear as well as industrial and military power. In 1956
Stalin and his personality cult were denounced by NIKITA KHRUSHCHEV.
Stalin Peak See IMENI ISMAIL SAMANI PEAK
Stalinabad See DUSHANBE
Stalingrad See VOLGOGRAD
TROTSKYISM.
Stalino See DONETSK
Stamboliyski
Stanhope, Charles Stanhope, 3rd Earl (b. Aug. 3, 1753, Lon-
don, Eng.—d. Dec. 15, 1816, Chevening, Kent) English politician and
inventor. A member of the House of Commons (1780–86), where he was
known as Lord Mahon until inheriting his father’s title, he became chair-
man of the Revolution Society and favoured parliamentary reform. He
sympathized with the French republicans and opposed Britain’s war with
Revolutionary France. He was also an experimental scientist and invented
calculating machines, a printing press and a microscope lens named for
him, a stereotyping machine, and a steam carriage.
Stanhope, James Stanhope, 1st Earl (b. 1673, Paris, France—d.
Stanislavsky
living determined for a group such as a country must be examined criti-
cally in terms of its constituent values. If the mean value increases over
time, but at the same time the rich become richer and the poor poorer, the
group may not be collectively better off. Various quantitative indicators
can be used as measuring rods, including life expectancy, access to nutri-
tious food and a safe water supply, and availability of medical care.
Standard Oil Company and Trust U.S. company and corporate
MEAN TIME.
DARDIZATION (ISO).
Standards and Technology, National Institute of See BUREAU
OF STANDARDS
ABLE; DWARF STAR; ECLIPSING VARIABLE STAR; FLARE STAR; GIANT STAR; POPULATIONS I
AND II; SUPERGIANT STAR; T TAURI STAR; VARIABLE STAR.
Star Wars See STRATEGIC DEFENSE INITIATIVE
starch Any of several white, granular organic compounds produced by
all green plants. They are POLYSACCHARIDES with the general chemical for-
mula (C6H10O5)n, where n may range from 100 to several thousand; the
constituent MONOSACCHARIDEs are GLUCOSE units made in PHOTOSYNTHESIS. The
stare decisis
START See STRATEGIC ARMS REDUCTION TALKS
Stasi
STD See SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASE
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Stavisky affair (cid:2) steel
Steamers Robert E. Lee and the Natchez in the race from New Orleans to St. Louis,
lithograph by Currier and Ives
BBC HULTON PICTURE LIBRARY
NACE) or scrap steel by the BASIC OXYGEN PROCESS, the OPEN-HEARTH PROCESS,
used to make bars, wire, tubes, sheets, and strips. Molten steel can also
be cast directly into products. Certain products, particularly of sheet steel,
are protected from CORROSION by ELECTROPLATING, GALVANIZING, or TINPLATING.
steel drum Tuned gong made from the end, and part of the wall, of an
oil barrel. The barrel’s end surface is hammered into a concave shape,
and several areas are outlined by chiseled grooves. It is heated and tem-
pered, and bosses or domes are hammered into the outlined areas; the
depth, curvature, and size of each boss determines its pitch. Melodies,
complex accompaniments, and COUNTERPOINT can be played with rubber-
tipped mallets on a single drum. The steel drum originated in Trinidad in
the 1940s. It is usually played in ensembles, called steel bands, of widely
varying sizes.
Steele, Sir Richard (b. 1672, Dublin, Ire.—d. Sept. 1, 1729, Car-
marthen, Carmarthenshire, Wales) English journalist, dramatist, essayist,
and politician. He began his long friendship with JOSEPH ADDISON at school
and attempted an army career before turning to writing. He launched and
was the principal author (under the name Isaac Bickerstaff) of the essay
periodical The Tatler (April 1709–January 1711), in which he created the
mixture of entertainment and instruction in manners and morals that he
and Addison would perfect in The SPECTATOR. His attractive, often casual
writing style was a perfect foil for Addison’s more measured, erudite
prose. He made many later ventures into journalism, some politically par-
tisan, and held several government posts. In 1714 he became governor of
DRUR Y LANE THEATRE, where he produced The Conscious Lovers (1723), one
of the century’s most popular plays and perhaps the best example of
English sentimental comedy.
Steen
ERNEST HEMINGWAY. An early sup-
porter of CUBISM, she tried to parallel
its theories in her work, including the
poetry
volume
Tender Buttons
(1914). Her prose was characterized
by a unique style employing repeti-
tion, fragmentation, and use of the
continuous present, especially in the
immense novel The Making of
Americans (written 1906–11, pub-
lished 1928). Her only book to reach
a wide public was The Autobiogra-
phy of Alice B. Toklas (1933), actu-
ally Stein’s own autobiography. Her
other works include Four Saints in
Three Acts (1934) and The Mother of
Us All (1947), opera librettos scored
by VIRGIL THOMSON.
Stein
stele
stenography See SHORTHAND
stenotypy
builder of long-span railroad bridges. The son of GEORGE STEPHENSON, he
assisted his father in constructing the Rocket and several railways. Build-
ing a railway from Newcastle to Berwick, he spanned the River Tyne with
a six-arch iron bridge. Called on to build a secure railroad bridge over the
Menai Strait to the Welsh mainland, Stephenson conceived a unique tubu-
lar design, the success of which led to his building other tubular bridges
in England and elsewhere.
Steptoe, Patrick (Christopher); and Edwards, Robert
Sterkfontein
reality. His later poetry, in collec-
tions such as Ideas of Order (1936),
The Man with the Blue Guitar
(1937), and The Auroras of Autumn
(1950), continued to explore this
theme with greater depth and rigour.
Not until his late years was he widely
read or recognized as a major poet by
more than a few; he received a
Pulitzer Prize only with his Col-
lected Poems in 1955. He is now
often considered one of America’s
greatest 20th-century poets.
Stevenson, Adlai E(wing) (b.
Feb. 5, 1900, Los Angeles, Calif.,
U.S.—d. July 14, 1965, London,
Eng.) U.S. politician and diplomat.
The grandson of a vice president of
the U.S., he practiced law in Chicago
from 1926. During World War II he was assistant to the secretary of the
navy (1941–44) and to the secretary of state (1945). He served as a U.S.
delegate to the UN (1946–47). As governor of Illinois (1949–53), he
introduced liberal reforms. Noted for his eloquence and wit, he was twice
the Democratic candidate for president (1952, 1956) but lost both times
to DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER. He later served as chief U.S. representative to
the UN (1961–65).
Stevenson, Robert Louis (Balfour) (b. Nov. 13, 1850, Edinburgh,
Stevin
Stiegel
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER appointed him to the SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED
mal veins (see HYDROTHERMAL ORE DEPOSITs) and in REPLACEMENT DEPOSITs. Sig-
the University of Chicago. He taught at various institutions and in 1977
founded the Center for the Study of the Economy and the State at the
University of Chicago. Stigler studied the economics of information,
elaborating on the traditional understanding of how efficient markets oper-
ate. He also studied public regulation, concluding that it is usually det-
rimental to consumer interests. He won the Nobel Prize in Economic
Sciences in 1982.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (b. Feb. 9, 1943, Gary, Ind., U.S.) U.S. economist.
He received a Ph.D. (1967) from the Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy and taught at several universities, including Yale, Harvard, Stanford,
and Columbia. From 1997 to 2000 he was the World Bank’s chief econo-
mist but often disagreed with the organization’s policies. Stiglitz helped
found modern development economics, and he changed how economists
think about the way markets work. His studies on asymmetric informa-
tion in the marketplace showed that the poorly informed can obtain infor-
mation from the better informed through a screening process, for example,
when insurance companies determine the risk factors of their clients. He
shared the 2001 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences with GEORGE A. AKER-
LOF and A. MICHAEL SPENCE.
stigmata
Stirling, William Alexander, 1st earl of (b. c. 1576, Menstrie,
stoichiometry
1826 I
stomach cancer (cid:2) Stonehenge
the SMALL INTESTINE. The vagus nerve and sympathetic nervous system con-
trol the stomach’s secretions and movements. Emotional stress affects its
function. Common disorders include GASTRITIS, PEPTIC ULCER, hiatal HERNIA, and
cancer. See also DIGESTION, GASTRECTOMY.
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION after its repu-
tation had been tarnished by the TEA-
POT DOME and other scandals. In 1925
Coolidge appointed him to the
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES,
and in 1941 Pres. FRANKLIN D.
ROOSEVELT promoted him to chief jus-
tice, a position he retained until his
death. He wrote more than 600 opin-
ions, many on important constitu-
tional questions. He was often less
successful, however, in building a
consensus among his associate jus-
tices, with the result that the court during his chief justiceship was often
a bitterly divided body.
Harlan Fiske Stone, 1929.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, WASHINGTON, D.C.
Stone, I(sidor) F(einstein) orig. Isidor Feinstein (b. Dec. 24,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
See PALEOLITHIC PERIOD; MESOLITHIC PERIOD; NEOLITHIC PERIOD; STONE-TOOL INDUS-
TR Y. See also BRONZE AGE; IRON AGE.
order) the OLDOWAN, ACHEULEAN, MOUSTERIAN, AURIGNACIAN, SOLUTREAN, and
Stonefly (Plecoptera)
WILLIAM E. FERGUSON
Storm Troopers See SA
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES by Pres. JAMES MADISON. There he joined
Stoss
also BONE CHINA, PORCELAIN.
Stono rebellion (1739) Largest
Stoppard, Sir Tom orig. Tomas Straussler (b. July 3, 1937, Zlín,
stored-program concept Storage of
solves crimes without
leaving his New York City apartment. Stout
endowed his detective with his own passions for haute cuisine and the
growing of orchids.
Stowe
Strasberg, Lee orig. Israel Strassberg (b. Nov. 17, 1901, Budza-
nów, Pol., Austria-Hungary—d. Feb. 17, 1982, New York, N.Y., U.S.)
Russian-born U.S. theatre director and teacher. At age seven he immi-
grated to New York City with his family. After acting lessons with teach-
ers who had studied under KONSTANTIN STANISLAVSKY, he became an actor
and stage manager with the Theatre Guild. In 1931 he cofounded the
GROUP THEATRE, where he directed brilliant experimental plays such as Men
in White (1933). After working in Hollywood (1941–48), he returned to
New York City to become artistic director of the ACTORS STUDIO, where he
expanded Stanislavsky’s teachings to further develop method acting, in
which actors use their own emotional memory for the purpose of dra-
matic motivation. He trained actors such as MARLON BRANDO, MARILYN MON-
ROE, DUSTIN HOFFMAN, GERALDINE PAGE, and Julie Harris.
Strasbourg
stratigraphy
Academy Award), Silkwood (1983), Out of Africa (1985), A Cry in the
Dark (1988), The Bridges of Madison County (1995), and The Hours
(2002).
streetcar or trolley car Passenger-carrying vehicle that runs on rails
laid in city streets. Streetcars in the 1830s were pulled by horses. Elec-
tric motors later supplied the power, with electricity transmitted by a trol-
ley from overhead electric lines. From the 1890s to the 1940s, streetcars
were widely used in cities around the world; they were gradually replaced
by the AUTOMOBILE, the BUS, and the SUBWAY, and by the 1950s few remained.
A variant, the cable car, invented in 1873 for use on San Francisco’s steep
hills, is drawn by a continuous cable set in a slot between the tracks.
Streicher
Strayhorn, Billy orig. William Thomas Strayhorn (b. Nov. 29,
See also LAMINAR FLOW, TURBULENT FLOW.
Streep, Meryl orig. Mary Louise Streep (b. June 22, 1949, Sum-
feres with the tubercle bacillus’s ability to synthesize certain vital pro-
teins. It still has some use in combination with penicillin for treating
endocarditis and with tetracyclines in the treatment of plague, tularemia,
and brucellosis.
Stresa Front
on the other. A variety of equipment is used, including dozers, scrapers,
hydraulic shovels, draglines, and bucket-wheel excavators. Concern over
the environmental effects of strip mining have resulted in numerous
requirements for the reclamation of excavated land.
strobilus See CONE
stroboscope Instrument that repeatedly illuminates a rotating or vibrat-
ing object in order to study the motion of the object or to determine its
rotation speed or vibration frequency. The effect is achieved by produc-
ing light in very short bursts timed to occur when the moving part is in
the same phase of its motion. By use of the stroboscope, a machine part,
for example, may be made to appear to slow down or stop.
Stroessner
ular systems, which are shaped to experience either pure tension or pure
compression. Bending structures include the GIRDER and two-way grids and
slabs. Funicular structures include CABLE STRUCTUREs, MEMBRANE STRUCTUREs,
and vaults and domes. See also FRAMED STRUCTURE; POST-AND-BEAM SYSTEM; SHELL
STRUCTURE.
ment are MICHEL FOUCAULT, JACQUES LACAN, ROMAN JAKOBSON, and ROLAND
BARTHES. Areas of study that have adopted and developed structuralist pre-
mises and methodologies include SEMIOTICS and narratology. See also
DECONSTRUCTION.
Structured Query Language See SQL
Struve
Sturges
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) Activist student orga-
PAGODAs,
places of PILGRIMAGE.
and incorporated the colony into Dutch territory (1655). Incursions from
the New England colonies and a squadron sent by Charles II forced him
to surrender New Netherland to the British (1664).
sty or hordeolum
also LAND MINE, MINESWEEPER.
submarine plateau See OCEANIC PLATEAU
submarine slump In a SUBMARINE CANYON or on a CONTINENTAL SLOPE, a
relatively rapid and sporadic downslope moving mass composed of sedi-
ment and organic debris that has built up slowly into an unstable or mar-
ginally stable mass. After an individual slump in a canyon, however, the
material tends to continue falling in a series of slumps until the sediment
mass attains a shallower, more stable slope. A slumping episode may also
trigger other slumps farther down the canyon.
subpoena
Sucre
Sudetenland
Sugawara Michizane
sukiya
Sully
Sullivan, Sir Arthur
(Sey-
SCHIZOPHRENIA, which he
Sullivan, John L(awrence) (b.
Oct. 15, 1858, Roxbury, Mass.,
Sulzberger
other by the belt. Sumo wrestling is an ancient sport with a complex sys-
tem of ranking; at the top of the hierarchy is the yokozuna (“grand cham-
pion”). Lengthy rituals and elaborate posturings accompany the bouts,
which are extremely brief, often lasting only a few seconds.
Sumter, Thomas (b. Aug. 14, 1734, Hanover county, Va.—d. June 1,
1832, South Mount, S.C., U.S.) American Revolutionary officer. He
served in the French and Indian War and later moved to South Carolina.
In the American Revolution he was commissioned a brigadier general and
escaped to North Carolina after the fall of Charleston (1780). He led the
state militia to victories over the British in several engagements. He
served in the U.S. House of Representatives (1789–93, 1797–1801) and
the Senate (1801–10). Fort Sumter was named for him (see FORT SUMTER
NATIONAL MONUMENT).
See also AMATERASU, RE, SHAMASH, SOL, SUR YA, TONATIUH.
Sun Yat-sen
Sunderland, Robert Spencer, 2nd earl of (b. Sept. 5, 1641,
PLANT.
Sundiata
supervenience
suprarenal gland See ADRENAL GLAND
Supreme Court of the United States Final court of APPEAL in the
Supreme Court have been the COMMERCE, DUE-PROCESS, and EQUAL-PROTECTION
Surabaya
SURGER Y, ORTHOPEDICS, PLASTIC SURGER Y, TRANSPLANT.
Suriname
surrogate motherhood Practice in which a woman (the surrogate
mother) bears a child for a couple unable to produce children, usually
because the wife is infertile or unable to carry a pregnancy to term. The
surrogate is impregnated either through ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION (usually with
the sperm of the husband) or through the implantation of an embryo pro-
duced by in vitro fertilization. The surrogate traditionally gives up all
parental rights, though this has been subject to legal challenge.
Surtees, Robert Smith (b. May 17, 1803, The Riding, Northumber-
land, Eng.—d. March 16, 1864, Brighton, Sussex) English novelist. Pas-
sionately addicted to riding to hounds from his youth, Surtees devoted
nearly all his writings to horses and riding. In 1831 he launched New
Sporting Magazine. His famous comic character Mr. Jorrocks, a blunt
Cockney grocer entirely given over to fox hunting, appeared in Jorrocks’s
Jaunts and Jollities (1838), Handley Cross (1843), and Hillingdon Hall
(1845). Among his other novels, which also portray the boredom, ill man-
ners, discomfort, and coarse food of English provincial life, are Hawbuck
Grange (1847) and Mr. Facey Romford’s Hounds (1865).
Surtsey
Sutherland, Dame Joan (b. Nov. 7, 1926, Sydney, Austl.) Austra-
lian soprano. After debuting in Sydney in 1947, she moved to London.
Having sung minor roles at Covent Garden from 1952, she established
her status as one of the leading coloraturas of the 20th century in a 1959
performance of Lucia di Lammermoor. She made her Metropolitan Opera
debut in 1961, and she became a favourite there and worldwide in bel
canto roles until her retirement in 1991.
Sutlej River
across the Alps; surrounded by a larger French force, he succeeded in
breaking out and, repulsing the pursuing French, escaped with most of his
army, a remarkable feat.
Suwannee
swami See SADHU AND SWAMI
Swammerdam
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
sweat gland (cid:2) sweet pea
Swedenborgians See NEW CHURCH
Sweet pea (Lathyrus odoratus)
SVEN SAMELIUS
experiments by REGINALD CRUNDALL PUNNETT and WILLIAM BATESON.
sweetbrier or eglantine Small,
Sweyn
RECOVER Y ADMINISTRATION and SOCIAL SECURITY.
Sybaris
of big-band swing. In smaller ensembles, improvised instrumental solos
generally follow a rendering of the melody.
Swiss chard See CHARD
switching theory Theory of CIRCUITs made up of ideal digital devices,
including their structure, behaviour, and design. It incorporates Boolean
logic (see BOOLEAN ALGEBRA), a basic component of modern digital switch-
ing systems. Switching is essential to telephone, telegraph, data process-
ing, and other technologies in which it is necessary to make rapid
decisions about routing information. See also QUEUING THEOR Y.
Europe. Area: 15,940 sq mi (41,284 sq km). Population (2005 est.):
7,519,000. Capitals: BERN (administrative), Lausanne (judicial). The popu-
lation is German, French, and Italian. Languages: German, French, Italian,
Sydow
Symons
Synge
Assyrians, and Babylonians. In the 6th century BC it became part of the
Persian ACHAEMENIAN EMPIRE, which fell to ALEXANDER THE GREAT in 330 BC.
system of equations or simultaneous equations In algebra,
two or more equations to be solved together (i.e., the solution must sat-
isfy all the equations in the system). For a system to have a unique solu-
tion, the number of equations must equal the number of unknowns. Even
then a solution is not guaranteed. If a solution exists, the system is con-
sistent; if not, it is inconsistent. A system of linear equations can be rep-
resented by a MATRIX whose elements are the coefficients of the equations.
Though simple systems of two equations in two unknowns can be solved
by substitution, larger systems are best handled with matrix techniques.
systems analysis In INFORMATION PROCESSING, a phase of SYSTEMS ENGI-
network software, and DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS.
Szczecin
T cell With the B CELL, one of the two main types of white blood cell, essen-
tial parts of the immune system. T cells originate in the bone marrow,
mature in the thymus, and travel in the blood to other lymphoid tissues,
such as the spleen, tonsils, and lymph nodes. Through receptor molecules
on their surfaces, T cells directly attack invaders (ANTIGENS) by binding to
them and helping remove them from the body. Because the body contains
millions of T and B cells, many of which carry unique receptors, it can
respond to virtually any antigen. See also ANTIBODY, IMMUNOLOGY.
T Tauri
Tachism
Tafilalt
Taha Hussein or Taha Husayn
and ermine) and is home to elks, bears, and wolves. Siberian taiga alone
accounts for 19% of the world’s forested area and possibly 25% of total
forest volume. Despite the remoteness of the taiga, it is a major source
of lumber for construction, and huge expanses have been clear-cut.
Taiga, Ike no See IKE NO TAIGA
Taine
Taiyuan
dynasty and of ALEXANDER THE GREAT and his successors. In the 7th–8th cen-
tury AD it was conquered by the Arabs, who introduced Islam. The Uzbeks
controlled the region in the 15th–18th centuries. In the 1860s the Russian
Empire took over much of Tajikistan. In 1924 it became an autonomous
republic under the administration of the Uzbek S.S.R., and it gained union
republic status in 1929. It achieved independence with the collapse of the
Soviet Union in 1991. Civil war raged through much of the 1990s between
government forces and an opposition composed mostly of Islamic mili-
tants. A peace agreement was reached in 1997.
Tajumulco
km) before joining the larger COOSA RIVER just north of MONTGOMER Y, Ala.,
to form the ALABAMA RIVER. Three private power dams have created reser-
voirs, including Lake Martin, for river control, power, and recreation.
Tallchief, Maria (b. Jan. 24, 1925, Fairfax, Okla., U.S.) U.S. ballet
dancer of Native American descent.
Tallchief
studied with BRONISLAVA
NIJINSKA before joining the BALLET
RUSSE DE MONTE CARLO (1942–47). She
joined the NEW YORK CITY BALLET in
1948 and became its prima ballerina,
creating leading roles in many bal-
choreographed for her by
(her husband
from 1946 to 1952), including Sym-
phonie concertante (1947), Caracole
(1952), and Pas de dix (1955). She
left the company in 1965, became
artistic director of the Lyric Opera
Ballet in Chicago, and founded the
Chicago City Ballet in 1980.
GEORGE BALANCHINE
Talleyrand
of the ANC. He became the ANC’s deputy president in 1958 and was
forced into exile in Zambia when it was banned in 1960. He was elected
ANC president in 1969 after the death of ALBERT LUTULI. He returned to South
Africa in ill health in 1990 and yielded the party presidency to Mandela.
tambourine Small frame drum with one skin nailed or glued to a shal-
low circular frame, into which jingles or pellet bells are set. It is held with
one hand and struck with the other, or simply shaken. Tambourines were
played in ancient Mesopotamia, Greece, and Rome, especially in religious
contexts, and they have long been prominent in Middle Eastern folk and
religious use. Crusaders took them to Europe in the 13th century.
Tamburlaine See TIMUR
Tamerlane See TIMUR
Tamil
Tan Malaka
Tanganyika
Tannenberg
Tanzimat
Tappan
Taranto
it was an important trade centre on the caravan routes to Europe and East
Asia. The Arabs conquered it in the early 8th century; it fell to the Mon-
gols in the 13th century and was under Turkish control in the 14th–15th
centuries. Taken by the Russians in 1865, it was made the administrative
centre of Turkistan in 1867, and a new European city grew up beside the
old native one. The city was heavily damaged by an earthquake in 1966.
Today it is the main economic and cultural centre of Central Asia. Its many
institutions of higher education include the Uzbek Academy of Sciences
(1943).
Tasman
the museum became completely independent only in 1954. In 1987 the
Clore Gallery was built to house the principal collection of J.M.W. TURNER’s
works. In 1988 a branch was opened in Liverpool. The Tate Modern, a con-
verted power plant housing the modern collections, opened in 2000.
Tathagata
during the ENGLISH CIVIL WARS and subsequently dismantled. Taunton later
was the scene of the duke of MONMOUTH’s rebellion (1685). It is in an
agricultural region; tourism is also important to the economy.
Taupo
down), with devastating neurological effects. Infants appear normal at
birth but soon become listless and inattentive, lose motor abilities, and
develop seizures. Blindness and general paralysis usually precede death.
Tests can detect the disease in fetuses and the Tay-Sachs gene in carriers.
There is no treatment.
Taylor, Dame Elizabeth (Rosemond) (b. Feb. 27, 1932, London,
TAYLORISM.
Taylor, John known as John Taylor of Caroline (b. Dec. 19?,
Taylor, Peter (Hillsman)
ceeded by MILLARD FILLMORE.
MOTION STUDY.
Taymyr
Tbilisi
tear duct and gland or lachrymal
Tees River
Teleki
munist, he devoted much energy to his crusade to keep the U.S. ahead of
the Soviet Union in nuclear arms; he opposed nuclear weapons treaties,
and he was principally responsible for convincing Pres. Ronald Reagan
of the need for the STRATEGIC DEFENSE INITIATIVE. In 2003 Teller was awarded
the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
Telloh See LAGASH
Telugu
ter, who conducts services and often asks for donations. BILLY GRAHAM
became known worldwide through his TV specials from the 1950s on.
Other prominent televangelists have included ORAL ROBERTS, JERR Y FALWELL,
and PAT ROBERTSON.
Tell Asmar See ESHNUNNA
Tell el-Amarna See Tell el-AMARNA
Tell Mardlkh See EBLA
and in 1943 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER
the MANHATTAN
PROJECT. At
recruited him for
the war’s end, Teller
advocated development of a fusion
bomb, and he won permission after
initial government resistance. With
STANISLAW ULAM he developed a work-
able HYDROGEN BOMB in 1952. That
same year he helped establish the
Lawrence Livermore Laboratory
(Livermore, Calif.), which became
the chief U.S. factory for nuclear weapons. In 1954 he joined the oppo-
sition to Oppenheimer’s continued security clearance. A staunch anticom-
Tempest, Dame Marie orig. Marie Susan Etherington (b. July
15, 1864, London, Eng.—d. Oct. 15, 1942, London) British actress. She
began her career as an operetta singer, winning acclaim for her charming
and high-spirited performances in Dorothy (1887) and touring the U.S. and
Canada in the early 1890s in operettas such as The Bohemian Girl and The
Pirates of Penzance. Turning to straight comedy in 1899, she appeared
notably in English Nell (1900), Mrs. Dot (1908), and Hay Fever (1925).
Tempietto
Ten Thousand Smokes, Valley of Volcanic region, southern
tenant See LANDLORD AND TENANT
tendinitis or tendonitis
Tennyson
ALBERT EINSTEIN, the success of his general theory of RELATIVITY led to their
widespread exploration and use by mathematicians and physicists.
tent caterpillar Any MOTH LARVA of the genus Malacosoma (family
Lasiocampidae). Tent caterpillars are often brightly coloured. Congrega-
tions of the eastern tent caterpillar (M. americanum) of eastern North
America spin huge, tent-shaped communal nests in forked tree branches.
Eggs the moth deposits on a tree in midsummer hatch in spring. The
hatched caterpillars migrate to a tree crotch and construct a silken tent,
which they leave each day throughout the summer to feed on the sur-
rounding leaves. The forest tent caterpillar (M. disstria) is common in the
southern U.S.
tent structure Building that uses masts or poles and tensile membrane
(e.g., fabric or animal skin) enclosures. Tent structures are prestressed by
externally applied forces so that they are held taut under anticipated load
conditions. Tents have been the dwelling places of most of the world’s
nomadic peoples, from ancient times until the present. The traditional
Bedouin tent consists of a rectangular membrane of strips of woven camel
hair that is strained on webbing straps and secured with guys over a rect-
angle of poles. The American Plains Indians developed the conical TEPEE.
The Central Asian nomadic pole dwelling, or yurt, uses skins and textiles
as its covering. See also MEMBRANE STRUCTURE, POLE CONSTRUCTION.
Tenure of Office Act (1867) Law forbidding the U.S. president to
remove civil officers without the consent of the Senate. Passed by the
RADICAL REPUBLICANs over the veto of Pres. ANDREW JOHNSON, the measure
sought to prevent Johnson from removing cabinet members who sup-
ported Congress’s harsh RECONSTRUCTION policies. When Johnson tried to
dismiss his secretary of war, EDWIN M. STANTON, an ally of the Radical
Republicans, Congress began IMPEACHMENT proceedings against him. The
law was partially repealed in 1869 and completely repealed in 1887; in
1926 it was found unconstitutional.
Tenzing Norgay
Teresa (of Calcutta), Blessed Mother orig. Agnes Gonxha
Teresa of Ávila, Saint orig. Teresa de Cepeda y Ahumada
Tereshkova
BEDLINGTON terrier, BOSTON TERRIER, BULL TERRIER, DANDIE DINMONT terrier, FOX
TERRIER, IRISH TERRIER, PIT BULL TERRIER, SCOTTISH TERRIER, YORKSHIRE TERRIER.
Terror, Reign of See REIGN OF TERROR
Tertiary
testcross Experiment in which an organism with unknown genetic
makeup is mated with an organism whose entire genetic makeup for a
trait is known, to determine which genes are carried by the former. In a
breed of dog, for example, in which the gene for black coat colour is
dominant over the gene for red coat colour (see DOMINANCE), a dog with a
black coat may be pure (with two genes for black coat colour) or hybrid
(with one gene for black and one for red). When its mating with a red-
coated dog (which always has two genes for red coat colour only) pro-
duces only black offspring, the black-coated parent must be pure, whereas
if some of the young are red, the parent must be hybrid.
testes or testicles Male reproductive organs (see REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM).
Humans have two oval-shaped testes 1.5–2 in. (4–5 cm) long that produce
SPERM and ANDROGENS (mainly TESTOSTERONE), contained in a sac (scrotum)
behind the PENIS. Each testis is divided into 200–400 lobes containing three
to 10 very thin coiled tubes (seminiferous tubules) each, which produce the
sperm and contract to expel them through a complex network of canals to
another structure in the scrotum, the epididymis, for temporary storage.
The cells in the testes are undeveloped in early childhood; at PUBERTY they are
stimulated by hormones to develop into fertile sperm cells.
testicular cancer Malignant tumour of the TESTIS, or testicle. Although
relatively rare, testicular CANCER is the most common malignancy for men
between the ages of 20 and 34. It typically affects men between 15 and
39 years old. A developmental abnormality of males in which one or both
testes fail to descend into the scrotum about the time of birth increases
the risk of developing the cancer later in life. The most notable symptom
of testicular cancer is the formation of a painless lump in either testis.
Treatment usually consists of the surgical removal of the cancerous tes-
tis, followed by radiation therapy or chemotherapy if the cancer has
metastasized.
testing machine Machine used in MATERIALS SCIENCE to determine the
properties of a material. Machines have been devised to measure TENSILE
strength, strength in compression, shear, and bending (see STRENGTH OF
MATERIALS), DUCTILITY, HARDNESS, impact strength (see IMPACT TEST), FRACTURE
toughness, CREEP, and FATIGUE. Standardization of machines and tests is the
province of the International Organization for Standardization, American
National Standards Institute, British Standards Institution, and many gov-
ernmental bodies. Many industries have special-purpose testing machines
for the materials they use.
testosterone
Tewodros II
Thales of Miletus
While secretary-general, he played a diplomatic role in the CUBAN MISSILE
CRISIS, devised a plan to end the Congolese civil war (1962), and sent
peacekeeping forces to Cyprus (1964).
Thapsus
times. From the 17th century the PROSCENIUM stage limited audience seat-
ing to the area directly in front of the stage. In the 1930s, plays at Mos-
cow’s Realistic Theatre were produced in the round and the arena stage
began to gain favour in Europe and the U.S. Its advantages are its infor-
mality and the rapport it creates between audience and actors, but it
requires actors to turn constantly to address new sections of the audience.
Théâtre National Populaire
Theodorakis
granted the authority of a religious teacher or the validity of a religious
experience. It is distinguished from PHILOSOPHY in being concerned with
justifying and explicating a faith, rather than questioning the underlying
assumptions of such faith, but it often employs quasi-philosophical meth-
Theophilus
thermal radiation Process by which energy is emitted by a warm
surface. The energy is ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION and so travels at the speed
of light and does not require a medium to carry it. Thermal radiation
ranges in FREQUENCY from infrared rays through visible light to ultraviolet
rays. The intensity and frequency distribution of the emitted rays are
determined by the nature and temperature of the emitting surface; in gen-
eral, the hotter the object, the shorter the wavelength. A hotter object is a
better emitter than a cooler one, and a blackened surface is a better emit-
ter than a silvered one. An example of thermal radiation is the heating of
the Earth by the Sun.
thermal spring See HOT SPRING
Thermidorian Reaction (1794) Revolt in the FRENCH REVOLUTION
against the REIGN OF TERROR that was initiated on 9 Thermidor (July 27).
Weary of the mounting executions (1,300 in June alone), deputies in the
NATIONAL CONVENTION decreed the arrest of MAXIMILIEN ROBESPIERRE, LOUIS DE
SAINT-JUST, and other members of the COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC SAFETY. They and
others were guillotined, inaugurating a brief “White Terror” against the
radical JACOBIN CLUB. The DIRECTOR Y period followed soon afterward.
thermocouple or thermal junction or thermoelectric ther-
thermometry
Thessaloníki
Third Section or Third Department Office created in 1826 by Tsar
Thirteen Articles of Faith or Thirteen Principles of Faith Sum-
Thiruvananthapuram formerly Trivandrum
Thomas, Lowell (Jackson) (b. April 6, 1892, Woodington, Ohio,
U.S.—d. Aug. 29, 1981, Pawling,
N.Y.) U.S. radio commentator, jour-
nalist, and author. A war correspon-
dent in Europe and the Middle East
while in his 20s, Thomas helped
make T.E. LAWRENCE famous with his
exclusive coverage and later with the
book With Lawrence in Arabia
(1924). He was a preeminent broad-
caster with CBS from 1930; his radio
nightly news was an American insti-
tution for nearly two generations,
and he appeared on television from
its earliest days. Out of his lifelong
globetrotting came lectures, travel-
ogues, and more than 50 books of
adventure and comment, including
Kabluk of the Eskimo (1932) and The
Seven Wonders of the World (1956).
Thomas, Norman (Mattoon)
Thomas à Kempis orig. Thomas Hemerken (b. 1379/80,
Thomas Aquinas, Saint See AQUINAS, SAINT THOMAS
Thomism
of photons. He later discovered isotopes and invented MASS SPECTROMETR Y.
In 1906 Thomson received a Nobel Prize for his research into the elec-
trical conductivity of gases. Throughout his life he was noted as an out-
standing teacher, and seven of his assistants also became Nobel laureates.
Thomson (of Fleet), Roy (Herbert) Thomson, 1st Baron (b.
Thonet
Thorpe, Jim in full James Francis Thorpe (b. May 28, 1888, near
Thorvaldsen
Three Emperors’ League German Dreikaiserbund Diplomatic
See also AUSTRO-GERMAN ALLIANCE.
threonine
including the hermit thrush and WOOD THRUSH, have notably beautiful songs.
See also BLACKBIRD, BLUEBIRD, CHAT, OUZEL, REDSTART, ROBIN.
Thuan Thien See LE LOI
Thucydides
thymine
Tiber River
stage—egg, larva, nymph, adult—on the ground; at the completion of
each stage, they attach to a host (usually a MAMMAL), engorge on blood,
then drop to the ground. Soft ticks feed intermittently, pass through sev-
eral nymphal stages, and live in the host’s den or nest. Hard ticks may
draw large amounts of blood, secrete paralyzing or lethal neurotoxins, and
transmit diseases. Soft ticks may also carry diseases. The deer tick is the
principal vector of LYME disease.
Ticonderoga
Tiglath-pileser
Tikhomirov
FRAMED structure, POST-AND-BEAM SYSTEM.
timbre
TimiÃ
Tippecanoe
Tishtrya
Titian
Tlaloc
Tocantins
lition government as vice premier (1945). He advocated a national,
democratically oriented form of communism and made the Italian Com-
munist Party the largest in western Europe. See also DEMOCRATIC PARTY OF
THE LEFT.
Togtokhtör See TO-WANG
T§j§ Hideki
Toland
Tolstoy, Aleksey (Konstantinovich), Count (b. Sept. 5, 1817, St.
Petersburg, Russia—d. Oct. 10, 1875, Krasny Rog) Russian poet, novel-
ist, and dramatist. A distant relative of LEO TOLSTOY, he held various court
posts. In the 1850s he began to publish comic verse, often satirizing gov-
ernment bureaucracy. Among his popular historical novels is Prince Sere-
brenni (1862). His dramatic trilogy about the 16th and 17th centuries—
The Death of Ivan the Terrible (1866), Tsar Feodor Ioannovich (1868),
and Tsar Boris (1870)—is written in blank verse and contains some of
Russia’s best historical dramatic writing. His lyric poetry includes many
love and nature poems, as well as Ioann Damaskin (1859), a paraphrase
of St. John of Damascus’s prayer for the dead.
Tolstoy, Aleksey (Nikolayevich), Count (b. Jan. 10, 1883,
Tolstoy, Leo Russian Lev Nikolayevich, Count Tolstoy (b. Sept.
LIZATION.
Toluca
Ringo, who brought the town a reputation for lawlessness. Feuds were
common, including the 1881 gun battle at the O.K. Corral between the
Earp (see WYATT EARP) and Clanton families. Tombstone was declared a
national historic landmark in 1962.
tomography
Tonkin Gulf Resolution See GULF OF TONKIN RESOLUTION
Tonle Sap
BLEEDING KANSAS.
topology
Tormé
to power in 1968 in a coup d’état. A nationalist and populist, he was one
of the few Latin American heads of state to visit FIDEL CASTRO in Cuba,
though he suppressed leftist labour agitators and students at home. In 1977
he achieved his supreme goal when U.S. Pres. JIMMY CARTER signed two
treaties agreeing to transfer the PANAMA CANAL and CANAL ZONE to Pana-
manian sovereignty in 1999. He died in a plane crash while on a military
inspection tour.
Tórshavn
Total Quality Control (TQC) System for optimizing production
based on ideas developed by Japanese industries from the 1950s on. The
system, which blends Western and Eastern ideas, began with the concept
of quality circles, in which groups of 10–20 workers were given respon-
sibility for the quality of the products they produced. It gradually evolved
into various techniques involving both workers and managers to maxi-
mize productivity and quality, including close monitoring of staff and
excellent customer service. The concept of kaizen,
the notion that
improvement must involve all members of a company, is central to TQC.
See also PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT.
Total Quality Management
(TQM) Management practices
designed to improve the performance of organizational processes in busi-
ness and industry. Based on concepts developed by statistician and man-
agement theorist W. EDWARDS DEMING, TQM includes techniques for
achieving efficiency, solving problems, imposing standardization and sta-
tistical control, and regulating design, housekeeping, and other aspects of
business or production processes. See also INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR
STANDARDIZATION (ISO); TOTAL QUALITY CONTROL (TQC).
Totonac
possibilities of the genre. His pieces are often sharply satirical, but he was
also capable of great sympathy, seen most poignantly in his studies of
prostitutes (e.g., At the Salon, 1896). His extraordinary style helped set
the course of avant-garde art for decades to come. A heavy drinker, he
died at 36.
Toungoo
towhee
decline of 26 civilizations. Criticisms of his Study include his use of myths
and metaphors as being of comparable value to factual data and his reliance
on a view of religion as a regenerative force. His other works include Civi-
lization on Trial (1948), East to West (1958), and Hellenism (1959).
Toyota Motor Corp. Largest Japanese automobile manufacturer and
one of the largest automotive companies in the world. It was established
in 1933 as a division of the Toyoda Automatic Loom Works, Ltd., and in
1937 it was incorporated as the Toyota Motor Co., Ltd. Toyota later estab-
lished many related companies, including Toyoda Machine Works, Ltd.
(1941), and Toyota Auto Body, Ltd. (1945). In the 1960s and ’70s the
company expanded rapidly, exporting large numbers of cars to foreign
markets. Following consolidations among many of its business units, the
company took the name Toyota Motor Corp. in 1982. It has assembly
plants and distributors in many foreign countries, and it owns subsidiar-
ies that produce cars and car parts, trucks, steel, synthetic resins, and
industrial equipment. Its brands include Toyota and Lexus.
Toyotomi Hideyoshi
trade, restraint of See RESTRAINT OF TRADE
trade, terms of Relationship between the prices at which a country
sells its exports and the prices paid for its imports. If a country’s export
prices rise relative to import prices, its terms of trade are said to have
moved in a favourable direction, since, in effect, it now receives more
imports for each unit of goods exported. The terms of trade, which depend
on the world supply of and demand for the goods involved, indicate how
the gains from international trade will be distributed among trading coun-
tries. An abrupt change in a country’s terms of trade (e.g., a drastic fall
in the price of its main export) can cause serious problems in its BALANCE
OF PAYMENTS. See also COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE.
Trafalgar
Trans-Alaska Pipeline or Alaska Pipeline Oil pipeline running
Trans World Airlines, Inc. (TWA) Former U.S. airline acquired by
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
trampoline (cid:2) transformer
See also TRANSCENDENTAL NUMBER.
as RALPH WALDO EMERSON, HENR Y DAVID THOREAU, MARGARET FULLER, and BRON-
SON ALCOTT. Transcendentalist writers and their contemporaries signaled
the emergence of a new national culture based on native materials, and
they were a major part of the AMERICAN RENAISSANCE in literature. They
advocated reforms in church, state, and society, contributing to the rise
of free religion and the abolition movement and to the formation of vari-
ous utopian communities, such as BROOK FARM. Some of the best writings
by minor Transcendentalists appeared in The Dial (1840–44), a literary
magazine.
transducer Device that converts one form of energy to another. A
MICROPHONE is an acoustic transducer, converting sound waves into elec-
trical signals. Different types of transducers act on heat, radiation, sound,
strain, vibrations, pressure, and acceleration; they may output mechani-
cal, electrical, pneumatic, or hydraulic signals. Examples include STRAIN
GAUGES, LOUDSPEAKERS, PHOTOCELLS, TRANSFORMERS, and THERMOCOUPLES.
transept Area of a cruciform (cross-shaped) church lying at right angles
to the principal axis. The bay at which the transept intersects the NAVE is
called the crossing. The nave of a church with a cruciform plan usually
extends west from the crossing, the choir and sanctuary east. The arms
of the transept are designated by direction, as northern transept and south-
ern transept.
transform See FOURIER TRANSFORM, INTEGRAL TRANSFORM, LAPLACE TRANSFORM
undoes it) in the group. See also GROUP THEOR Y, INTEGRAL TRANSFORM, LINEAR
TRANSFORMATION.
transformer Device that transfers electric energy from one ALTERNATING-
CURRENT CIRCUIT to one or more other circuits, either increasing (stepping
up) or reducing (stepping down) the voltage. Uses for transformers
include reducing the line voltage to operate low-voltage devices (door-
bells or toy electric trains) and raising the voltage from electric GENERA-
TORS so that electric power can be transmitted over long distances.
Transformers act through ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION; current in the primary
coil induces current in the secondary coil. The secondary voltage is cal-
culated by multiplying the primary voltage by the ratio of the number of
turns in the secondary coil to that in the primary.
transfusion See BLOOD TRANSFUSION
transistor SOLID-STATE SEMICONDUCTOR device for amplifying, controlling,
and generating electrical signals. Invented at Bell Labs (1947) by JOHN
BARDEEN, WALTER H. BRATTAIN, and WILLIAM B. SHOCKLEY, it displaced the
See also RARE EARTH METAL.
transitive law Property of relationship that states that if A is in a given
relation to B and B is in the same relation to C, then A is also in that
relation to C. Equality, for example, is a transitive relation.
Transkei
SEABORG.
Transvaal
Trebbia River
Trenton and Princeton, Battles of (1776–77) Engagements won
Trevelyan
TRIGONOMETR Y.
Trianon
trichomonad
trimurti
triple jump or hop, step, and jump TRACK-AND-FIELD distance jump.
Tripoli
triumvirate
Trondheim
TROUT; BROWN TROUT; LAKE TROUT; RAINBOW TROUT.
trouvère
developed in the 1820s. The trumpet has been associated with ceremo-
nial and military uses since the 16th century. It joined the standard orches-
tra by c. 1700, though it was only selectively used, usually with the
timpani. Its brilliant sound has since made it indispensable in a wide vari-
ety of ensembles. See also CORNET; FLÜGELHORN.
trumpeter swan Black-billed species (Cygnus cygnus buccinator) of
SWAN, named for its far-carrying, low-pitched call. About 6 ft (1.8 m) long,
with a 10-ft (3-m) wingspan, it is the largest swan, though it weighs less
than the mute swan. Once threatened with extinction (fewer than 100 were
counted in the U.S. in 1935), it has made a strong comeback; though still
listed as vulnerable, its population in western Canada and the northwest-
ern U.S. now exceeds 5,000.
Truong Chinh
Truth, Sojourner orig. Isabella Van Wagener (b. c. 1797, Ulster
county, N.Y., U.S.—d. Nov. 26,
1883, Battle Creek, Mich.) U.S.
evangelist and social reformer. The
daughter of slaves, she spent her
childhood as an abused chattel of
several masters. After being freed in
about 1827, she worked as a domes-
tic in New York City (1829–43) and
began preaching on street corners
with the evangelical missionary Eli-
jah Pierson. Adopting the name
Sojourner Truth, she left New York
to obey a “call” to travel and preach.
Adding ABOLITIONISM and women’s
rights to her religious messages, she
traveled in the Midwest, where her
magnetism drew large crowds. At the
start of the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR she
gathered supplies for black volunteer
regiments.
In 1864 she went
Washington, D.C., where she helped
integrate streetcars and was received
at the White House by Pres. ABRAHAM LINCOLN. After the war she worked
for the freedmen’s relief organization and encouraged migration to Kan-
sas and Missouri.
TRW Inc. U.S. manufacturer of advanced equipment and systems for
industry and government. Founded in 1901 as a maker of cap screws, it
was incorporated in 1916 as the Steel Products Co. The name was changed
to Thompson Products, Inc., in 1926, then to Thompson Ramo Woold-
ridge Inc. after a merger in 1958, and to TRW Inc. in 1965. Through its
various divisions and subsidiaries, TRW designed and manufactured a
wide range of automotive parts, electronic systems for military aircraft,
and spacecraft. Its information systems and services segments maintain
databases for screening credit histories. In 2002 defense contractor
Northrop Grumman acquired TRW for its aerospace division.
tryptophan
Tsvet
BROWN, who called her General Tubman. In the American Civil War, she
served as a nurse, laundress, and spy for Union forces in South Carolina.
She later settled in Auburn, N.Y., and was eventually granted a federal
pension for her war work.
Tubman, William V(acanarat) S(hadrach) (b. Nov. 29, 1895,
Harper, Liberia—d. July 23, 1971, London, Eng.) President of Liberia
(1944–71). Tubman educated himself in law before entering public ser-
vice, eventually ascending to the Supreme Court (1937–44). As president,
Tubman enacted suffrage and property rights for women, authorized par-
ticipation in government by all ethnic groups, and established a nation-
wide public-school system.
Tuchman
37); he was made a marshal of the Soviet Union in 1935. A victim of the
PURGE TRIALS in 1937, he was tried and executed with other top Red Army
commanders. In 1988 he was cleared judicially and rehabilitated by offi-
cial decree.
Tukulor
apparatus, high-speed rotors, and SOLAR-ENERGY devices. Tungsten is rela-
tively inert, but compounds (in which it has various VALENCEs) are known.
The most important, tungsten CARBIDE, noted for its hardness, is used to
increase the wear-resistance of cast iron and of tools’ cutting edges.
tungsten-halogen lamp See HALOGEN LAMP
Tungusic languages See MANCHU-TUNGUS LANGUAGES
Tunguska event
Tupac Amarú
Turcoman See TURKMEN
Turenne
Turkana, Lake See Lake RUDOLF
Turing test (cid:2) Turkic peoples
Male common turkey (Meleagris gallo-
pavo), displaying.
S.C. BISSEROT—BRUCE COLEMAN INC.
turkey vulture or turkey buzzard Species (Cathartes aura) of
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
istan. The nomadic, tribal Turkmen prob-
ably entered the area in the 11th century
AD. They were conquered by the Russians
in the early 1880s, and the region became
part of Russian Turkistan. It was organized
as the Turkmen S.S.R. in 1924 and became a constituent republic of the
U.S.S.R. in 1925. The country gained full independence from the Soviet
Union in 1991 under the name Turkmenistan. It experienced years of eco-
nomic difficulty until oil and gas production was more fully developed
and was subject to the highly authoritarian rule of Saparmurad Niyazov.
Turks and Caicos
Turner, J(oseph) M(allord) W(illiam) (b. April 23, 1775, London,
Turner, Ted orig. Robert Edward Turner, III (b. Nov. 19, 1938,
PAINTED TURTLE, SNAPPING TURTLE, SOFTSHELL TURTLE, TERRAPIN, TORTOISE.
Tusculum
Tussaud
tury the town was called Soli (meaning “salts”), and its present name is
from the Turkish tuz, “salt.” It was a Turkish garrison town from 1510
until it passed to the Austro-Hungarian Empire in the 19th century. It was
incorporated into Yugoslavia in 1918. It is the centre for a mining region
and an agricultural district. It was a target during the war in Bosnia in the
1990s (see BOSNIAN CONFLICT).
TVA See TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY
TWA See TRANS WORLD AIRLINES, INC.
Twain, Mark orig. Samuel Langhorne Clemens (b. Nov. 30,
Tweed, William Marcy known as Boss Tweed (b. April 3, 1823,
COURTESY OF THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, WASHINGTON,
Boss Tweed
TVA (cid:2) Tyler
pered by the fact that court judgments were rendered according to unwrit-
ten custom preserved only within a small group of learned patricians. The
Twelve Tables were not a reform or a liberalizing of old custom; they
recognized the prerogatives of the patrician class and of the patriarchal
family, the validity of enslavement for unpaid debt, and the interference
of religious custom in civil cases. Because only random quotations from
the Twelve Tables are extant, knowledge about their contents is largely
derived from references in later juridical writings. Venerated by the
Romans as a prime legal source, the Twelve Tables were superseded by
later changes in Roman law but were never formally abolished.
Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corp. U.S. movie studio. It was
Twentieth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
founder of CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY. He
MISM; SOCIOCULTURAL EVOLUTION.
Tyne and Wear
MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER; HANS ZINSSER.
typographic printing See LETTERPRESS PRINTING
typography Design or selection of letter forms to be organized into
words and sentences and printed or displayed electronically. Typography
originated after the invention of printing from movable type in the mid
15th century. The three major type families in the history of Western
printing are ROMAN, italic, and BLACK LETTER (Gothic). All had their origin in
the scripts of the calligraphers whose work was ultimately replaced by
printing. In the succeeding centuries typographers have created some
10,000 typefaces (a complete set of letter forms of a particular design).
Depending on the style of their letters, typefaces are categorized as old
style, transitional, and modern. Commonly used typefaces include Caslon,
Baskerville, Bodoni, Garamond, and Times New Roman. See also JOHN
BASKERVILLE; GIAMBATTISTA BODONI; STANLEY MORISON. The selection of a type-
face is an important part of the aesthetic process in GRAPHIC DESIGN.
tyrannosaur Any of a group of related carnivorous dinosaurs similar
to the ALLOSAURS. Tyrannosaurus rex is the largest and best known, found
as fossils in Late Cretaceous (99–65 million years ago) deposits of North
America and eastern Asia. Some adults were more than 40 ft (12 m) long
and 16–18 ft (over 5 m) tall and weighed 6 tons (5.4 metric tons) or more.
Tyrannosaurs walked with a stooped posture, carrying the body forward
and the long tail off the ground. They had a short, thick neck, a very large
skull, and pointed teeth, up to 6 in. (15 cm) long, with serrated edges.
Each small forelimb had two claws, perhaps for holding struggling prey.
A nearly complete skeleton of T. rex called “Sue” is on display at the
Field Museum in Chicago. Other tyrannosaurs include Albertosaurus,
Alectrosaurus, and Nanotyrannus.
tyrant In ancient Greece, a cruel and oppressive absolute ruler. The Greek
tyrannos was a ruler who seized power unconstitutionally or inherited such
power. Though tyrants often replaced aristocratic regimes that were them-
selves unpopular, the Greeks resented their illegal autocracy, and those
who killed tyrants received high honours. CYPSELUS and PERIANDER of Corinth
and DIONYSIUS I of Syracuse were among the most famous tyrants.
U-boat German Unterseeboot (“undersea
Uaxactún
Ugarit
SIAN, and POLISH. With the fall of the Zaporizhzhya COSSACKS in the 18th
century, Ukrainian speakers were stateless and the status of the language,
thought of as peasant speech by the nobility, was low. The language and
orthography (using a form of the CYRILLIC ALPHABET) were gradually stan-
dardized in the 19th century.
ukulele
X-ray region of the ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM.
!Umar ibn al-Kha$$)b
uncertainty principle or Heisenberg uncertainty principle
unconscious or subconscious
underground See SUBWAY
Underground See RESISTANCE
Undset
unified science or unity-of-science view In the philosophy of
force causes CENTRIPETAL ACCELERATION.
Uniform Resource Locator See URL
uniformitarianism Doctrine in geology that physical, chemical, and
biologic processes now at work on and within the Earth have operated
with general uniformity (in the same manner and with essentially the same
intensity) through immensely long periods of time and are sufficient to
account for all geologic change. In other words, the present is the key to
the past. Although the term is no longer much used, the principle, origi-
nated by JAMES HUTTON, is fundamental to geologic thinking and underlies
the whole development of the science of geology. See also CHARLES LYELL.
Unilever
UNICEF in full United Nations Children’s Fund formerly (1946–
53) United Nations International Children’s Emergency
unidentified flying object
shops are uncommon in most countries, but they are both legal and com-
mon in the U.S. and Japan. In the U.S., workers in an enterprise usually
choose, by majority vote, a single union to represent them, though in some
states RIGHT-TO-WORK LAWs prohibit requiring union membership as a con-
dition of employment, thus forbidding both the union shop and the closed
shop.
unit trust See MUTUAL FUND
Unitarianism Religious movement that stresses free use of reason in
religion, holds that God exists in only one person, and denies the divin-
ity of JESUS and the doctrine of the Holy TRINITY. Its modern roots are traced
to several liberal, radical, and rationalist thinkers of the Protestant REFOR-
MATION, who were in turn inspired by ARIUS. The mainstream of British
and American Unitarianism grew out of Calvinist PURITANISM. The scien-
tist JOSEPH PRIESTLEY was a founder of the English Unitarians, who became
a force in Parliament and were noted advocates of social reform. In the
U.S., Unitarianism developed out of New England CONGREGATIONALISM that
rejected the 18th-century revival movement. TRANSCENDENTALISM injected
Unitarianism with a new interest that attracted many more followers. See
also CALVINISM, UNIVERSALISM.
Unitas
Union Islands See TOKELAU
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (U.S.S.R.) or Soviet
SIA, TAJIKISTAN, TURKMENISTAN, UKRAINE, and UZBEKISTAN. It also contained 20
United Arab Republic (cid:2) United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland or
United Kingdom or Great Britain Island country, western Europe,
North Atlantic Ocean. It comprises GREAT BRITAIN (ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and
rulers agreed to entrust foreign relations to
Britain, but the British never assumed sov-
ereignty; each state maintained full inter-
nal control. The states formed the Trucial
States Council in 1960 and in 1971 termi-
nated defense treaties with Britain and established the six-member fed-
eration. Ra#s al-Khaymah joined it in 1972. The UAE aided coalition
forces against Iraq in the First PERSIAN GULF WAR (1991).
United Arab Republic See EGYPT
CHARLIE CHAPLIN, MAR Y PICKFORD, DOUGLAS FAIRBANKS, and D.W. GRIFFITH so that
United Automobile Workers (UAW) in full International
Union, United Automobile, Aerospace, and Agricultural
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
WALES) and NORTHERN IRELAND. Area: 93,788
sq mi (242,910 sq km). Population (2005
est.): 60,020,000. Capital: LONDON. The
population is composed of English (major
ethnic group), Scots, Irish, and Welsh and
immigrants and their descendants from India, the West Indies, Pakistan,
Bangladesh, and Africa. Languages: English (official); also Welsh, Scot-
1966 I United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (cid:2) United Mine Workers of America
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
British Sovereigns
1377–99
1399–1413
1413–22
1422–61
1461–70
1470–71
1471–83
1483–85
1483–1509
1509–1547
1547–53
1553–58
1558–1603
1603–25
1625–49
1653–58
1658–59
1660–85
1685–88
1689–17023
1702–14
1714–27
1727–60
1760–1820
1820–30
1830–37
1837–1901
1901–10
1910–36
19364
1936–52
1952–
978–1013
1013–14
925–39
939–46
946–55
955–59
959–75
975–78
802–39
839–56/58
855/56–60
860–65/66
865/66–71
871–99
899–924
Kings of Wessex
Richard II (P)
Egbert (S)
Henry IV (P:L)
Aethelwulf (S)
Henry V (P:L)
Aethelbald (S)
Henry VI (P:L)
Aethelberht (S)
Edward IV (P:Y)
Aethelred I (S)
Henry VI2
Alfred the Great (S)
Edward IV2
Edward the Elder (S)
Edward V (P:Y)
Sovereigns of England
Richard III (P:Y)
Athelstan1 (S)
Henry VII (T)
Edmund I (S)
Henry VIII (T)
Eadred (S)
Edward VI (T)
Eadwig (S)
Mary I (T)
Edgar (S)
Elizabeth I (T)
Edward the Martyr (S)
Sovereigns of Great
Ethelred II the
Britain and the
Unready (S)
United Kingdom
Sweyn Forkbeard (D)
James I (VI of 
Ethelred II the 
Scotland) (St)
Unready2 (S)
Charles I (St)
Edmund II Ironside (S)
Commonwealth
Canute (D)
Oliver Cromwell
Harold I Harefoot (D)
Richard Cromwell
Hardecanute (D)
Charles II (St)
Edward the 
James II (St)
Confessor (S)
William III &
Harold II (S)
Mary II (O/St)
William I the 
Anne (St)
Conqueror (N)
1066–87
George I (H)
William II (N)
1087–1100
George II (H)
Henry I (N)
1100–35
George III (H)
Stephen (B)
1135–54
George IV (H)
Henry II (P)
1154–89
William IV (H)
Richard I (P)
1189–99
Victoria (H)
John (P)
1199–1216
Edward VII (SCG)
Henry III (P)
1216–72
George V (W)
Edward I (P)
1272–1307
Edward VIII (W)
Edward II (P)
1307–27
George VI (W)
Edward III (P)
1327–77
Elizabeth II (W)
Dynasty or house: S=Saxon, D=Danish, N=Norman, B=Blois,
P=Plantagenet, L=Lancaster, Y=York, T=Tudor, St=Stuart, O=Orange,
H=Hanover, SCG=Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, W=Windsor
1Athelstan was king of Wessex and the first king of all England.
2restored
3William and Mary, as husband and wife, reigned jointly until Mary’s death
in 1694.
4Edward VIII succeeded on the death of his father on January 20, 1936, but
abdicated on December 11 before his coronation.
1014–16
1016–35
1035–40
1040–42
1042–66
and dependencies. With UN forces, it participated in the KOREAN WAR
(1950–53). In 1956 it intervened militarily in Egypt during the SUEZ CRI-
SIS. It joined the EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY, a forerunner of the EURO-
PEAN UNION, in 1973. In 1982 it defeated Argentina in the FALKLAND ISLANDS
WAR. As a result of continuing social strife in Northern Ireland, it joined
with Ireland in several peace initiatives, which eventually resulted in an
agreement to establish an assembly in Northern Ireland. In 1997 refer-
enda approved in Scotland and Wales devolved power to both countries,
though both remained part of the U.K. In 1991 the U.K. joined an inter-
national coalition to reverse Iraq’s conquest of Kuwait (see First PERSIAN
GULF WAR). In 2003 the U.K. and the U.S. attacked Iraq and overthrew
the government of ÍADD0M hUSSEIN (see Second PERSIAN GULF WAR). Ter-
rorist bombings in London in July 2005 killed more than 50 people.
United Mine Workers of America (UMWA) U.S. labour union.
United Nations (cid:2) United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in the later 20th century with the waning of the labour movement and the
rise of alternative sources of fuel, and by the 1990s it had fewer than
200,000 members.
United Nations (UN) International organization founded (1945) at the
end of World War II to maintain international peace and security, develop
friendly relations among nations on equal terms, and encourage interna-
tional cooperation in solving intractable human problems. A number of
its agencies have been awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace, and the UN
was the corecipient, with KOFI ANNAN, of the prize in 2001. The term
originally referred to the countries that opposed the Axis powers. An
U.N. Member States
1945 Argentina, Belarus, Brazil, Chile, China, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, France, Haiti, Iran, Lebanon, Luxembourg,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Russian
Federation3, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom, United
States of America, Yugoslavia, Greece, India, Peru, Australia, Costa Rica,
Liberia, Colombia, Mexico, S. Africa, Canada, Ethiopia, Panama, Bolivia,
Venezuela, Guatemala, Norway, Netherlands, Honduras, Uruguay,
Ecuador, Iraq, Belgium
1946 Afghanistan, Iceland, Sweden, Thailand
Pakistan, Yemen6
Burma (Myanmar)
Israel
Indonesia
1955 Albania, Austria, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Finland, Hungary, Ireland, Italy,
Jordan, Laos, Libya, Nepal, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Sri Lanka
1956 Morocco, Sudan, Tunisia, Japan
1957 Ghana, Malaysia
1958 Guinea
Benin, Upper Volta (Burkina Faso), Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ivory Coast, Cyprus,
Gabon, Madagascar, Niger, Somalia, Togo, Mali, Senegal, Nigeria
Sierra Leone, Mauritania, Mongolia, Tanzania5
Burundi, Jamaica, Rwanda, Trinidad and Tobago, Algeria, Uganda
1963 Kuwait, Kenya
1964 Malawi, Malta, Zambia
1965 Gambia, Maldives, Singapore
1966 Guyana, Botswana, Lesotho, Barbados
1968 Mauritius, Swaziland, Equatorial Guinea
Bahrain, Bhutan, Qatar, Oman, United Arab Emirates
Bahamas, Germany2
Bangladesh, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau
1975 Cape Verde, Mozambique, São Tome and Principe, Papua New Guinea,
Comoros, Suriname
Seychelles, Angola, Samoa
1977 Djibouti, Vietnam
Solomon Islands, Dominica
Saint Lucia
Zimbabwe, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
1981 Vanuatu, Belize, Antigua and Barbuda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Brunei Darussalam
1990 Namibia, Liechtenstein
Estonia, N. Korea, S. Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
1992 Armenia, Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, San Marino, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Slovenia, Georgia
1993 Czech Republic1, Slovakia1, Macedonia4, Eritrea, Monaco, Andorra
Palau
1999 Kiribati, Nauru, Tonga
Tuvalu
East Timor (Timor-Leste), Switzerland
1 Czechoslovakia was an original member from 1945. The Czech Republic
and the Slovak Republic obtained separate memberships in 1992.
2 E. Germany and W. Germany were admitted as separate members in
1973; the two countries reunified in 1990.
3 The seat held by the Soviet Union, a member from 1945, was assumed by
Russia in 1991.
4Macedonia is referred to in the U.N. as “The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia” pending settlement of a dispute over its name.
5 Tanganyika, a member from 1961, merged in 1964 with Zanzibar, a
member from 1963, to form the new country of Tanzania.
6N. Yemen, a member from 1947, merged in 1990 with S. Yemen, a mem-
ber from 1967.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
international organization was discussed at the YALTA CONFERENCE in Feb-
ruary 1945, and the UN charter was drawn up two months later at the UN
Conference on International Organization. The UN has six principal
organs: the Economic and Social Council, the UNITED NATIONS GENERAL
ASSEMBLY, the INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE, the SECRETARIAT, the UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL, and the UNITED NATIONS TRUSTEESHIP COUNCIL. It also
has 14 specialized agencies—some inherited from its predecessor, the
LEAGUE OF NATIONS (e.g., the INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION)—and a
United Nations Children’s Fund See UNICEF
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD) Organ of the UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY, created in
1964 to promote international trade. Its highest policy-making body, the
Conference, meets every four years; when the Conference is not in ses-
sion, the organization is run by its executive body, the Trade and Devel-
opment Board. UNCTAD’s principal functions include the promotion of
trade between countries in different stages of development and with dif-
ferent economic systems, initiation of negotiations for trade agreements,
and the formulation of international trade policies. In the late 20th and
early 21st centuries, UNCTAD’s efforts were directed toward the prob-
lems created in developing countries by economic globalization, and spe-
cial attention was given to measures to help the poorest and least-
developed countries become integrated into the world economy.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) UN orga-
nization formed in 1965 to promote environmentally sustainable human
development in low-income countries. Based in New York City, the
UNDP is headed by an administrator who oversees a 36-member Execu-
tive Board representing both developing and developed countries. Recent
programs have focused on reducing poverty, developing strategies to treat
and combat the spread of HIV/AIDS, promoting environmentally sound
energy and economic policies, and expanding communications and tech-
nology infrastructure. UNDP resident representatives in more than 125
developing countries help to coordinate the local activities of other UN
agencies and programs, as well as those of nongovernmental organiza-
tions.
United Nations General Assembly One of six principal compo-
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Office of
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitar-
ian Affairs (OCHA) formerly (1972–92) Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator,
Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs Agency of the
(1992–98) United
UNITED NATIONS SECRETARIAT, established in 1972 to coordinate international
relief to countries struck by natural or other disaster. Responding to
requests from stricken states for disaster assistance, the OCHA directs UN
1968 I United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (cid:2) United States
assistance and mobilizes aid from nongovernmental organizations such as
the International Red Cross. Since the 1980s it has emphasized disaster
preparedness and prevention, and it has assisted in executing projects of
the UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME.
U.S. Presidents and Vice Presidents
President
Vice president
United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration
Administrative body (1943–47) for an extensive social-welfare program
for war-ravaged nations. It distributed relief supplies and services, includ-
ing shelter, food, and medicine, and helped with agricultural and economic
rehabilitation. Its functions were later taken over by the INTERNATIONAL
REFUGEE ORGANIZATION, the WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, and UNICEF.
United Nations Resolution 242 Resolution of the UNITED NATIONS
United Nations Security Council Division of the UNITED NATIONS
United Nations Trusteeship Council One of the main organs of
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
George Washington
John Adams
Thomas Jefferson
1789–97
1797–1801
1801–9
James Madison
James Monroe
John Quincy Adams
Andrew Jackson
1809–17
1817–25
1825–29
1829–37
Martin Van Buren
1837–41
William Henry Harrison 1841*
John Tyler
1841–45
James K. Polk
1845–49
Zachary Taylor
1849–50*
Millard Fillmore
1850–53
Franklin Pierce
1853–57
James Buchanan
1857–61
Abraham Lincoln
1861–65*
Andrew Johnson
Ulysses S. Grant
1865–69
1869–77
John Adams
Thomas Jefferson
Aaron Burr
George Clinton
George Clinton
Elbridge Gerry
Daniel D. Tompkins
John C. Calhoun
John C. Calhoun
Martin Van Buren
Richard M. Johnson
John Tyler
1789–97
1797–1801
1801–5
1805–9
1809–12*
1813–14*
1817–25
1825–29
1829–32**
1833–37
1837–41
George Mifflin Dallas
Millard Fillmore
1845–49
1849–50
William Rufus de Vane King 1853*
John C. Breckinridge
1857–61
Hannibal Hamlin
1861–65
Andrew Johnson
Schuyler Colfax
Henry Wilson
William A. Wheeler
Chester A. Arthur
Rutherford B. Hayes
James A. Garfield
Chester A. Arthur
Grover Cleveland
Benjamin Harrison
Grover Cleveland
William McKinley
Theodore Roosevelt
William Howard Taft
Woodrow Wilson
Warren G. Harding
Calvin Coolidge
Herbert Hoover
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Harry S. Truman
Dwight D. Eisenhower
John F. Kennedy
Lyndon B. Johnson
Richard M. Nixon
Gerald R. Ford
Jimmy Carter
Ronald Reagan
George Bush
William J. Clinton
George W. Bush
1901–9
1909–13
1913–21
1921–23*
1923–29
1929–33
1933–45*
1877–81
1881*
1881–85
1885–89
Thomas A. Hendricks
1889–93
Levi Parsons Morton
1893–97
Adlai E. Stevenson
1897–1901* Garret A. Hobart
Theodore Roosevelt
Charles Warren Fairbanks
James Schoolcraft Sherman
Thomas R. Marshall
Calvin Coolidge
Charles G. Dawes
Charles Curtis
John Nance Garner
Henry A. Wallace
Harry S. Truman
Alben W. Barkley
Richard M. Nixon
Lyndon B. Johnson
Hubert H. Humphrey
Spiro T. Agnew
Gerald R. Ford
Nelson A. Rockefeller
Walter F. Mondale
George Bush
Dan Quayle
Albert Gore
Richard B. Cheney
1974–77
1977–81
1981–89
1989–93
1993–2001
2001–
1945–53
1953–61
1961–63*
1963–69
1969–74**
1869–73
1873–75*
1877–81
1885*
1889–93
1893–97
1897–99*
1905–9
1909–12*
1913–21
1921–23
1925–29
1929–33
1933–41
1941–45
1949–53
1953–61
1961–63
1965–69
1969–73**
1973–74
1974–77
1977–81
1981–89
1989–93
1993–2001
2001–
*Died in office.
**Resigned from office.
highest point is Alaska’s Mount MCKINLEY; within the conterminous states
it is Mount WHITNEY, Calif. Chief rivers are the MISSISSIPPI system, the
COLORADO, the COLUMBIA, and the RIO GRANDE. The GREAT LAKES, the GREAT
JAMESTOWN, Va. (1607); PLYMOUTH, Mass. (1620); Maryland (1634); and
Pennsylvania (1681). The English took New York, New Jersey, and Dela-
ware from the Dutch in 1664, a year after English noblemen had begun
to colonize the Carolinas. The British defeat of the French in 1763 (see
FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR) assured Britain political control over its 13 colo-
nies. Political unrest caused by British colonial policy culminated in the
AMERICAN REVOLUTION (1775–83) and the DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE
United States (cid:2) United States Marine Corps
1949. The Department of the Air Force is headquartered at the PENTAGON.
Separate operating agencies of the Air Force include the Air Force
Reserve, the Air Force Intelligence Service, and the U.S. AIR FORCE ACAD-
EMY. In 2000 there were over 350,000 Air Force personnel on active duty.
United States Air Force Academy Institution for the training of
United States Courts of Appeals In the U.S., the intermediate
appellate courts included in the federal judicial system and created by act
of Congress. There are 13 courts of appeal, including 12 courts whose
jurisdictions are geographically apportioned, and the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Federal Circuit, whose jurisdiction is subject-oriented and
nationwide. The Federal Circuit court, located in Washington, D.C., was
created by an act of Congress in 1982 and hears appeals from U.S. dis-
trict and territorial courts primarily in patent and trademark cases, though
it also hears appeals in cases in which the United States or its agencies is
a defendant, as in alleged breaches of contract or in tax disputes. The
courts are empowered to review the decisions of federal district courts
(see UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT), as well as the decisions of the divisions
of the U.S. Tax Court within their jurisdictions and those of the U.S.
Bankruptcy Courts. All decisions of the courts are subject to review by
the SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES.
United States, Bank of the See BANK OF THE U.S.
United States Air Force (USAF) Major component of the U.S. mili-
tary organization, with primary responsibility for AIR WARFARE, air defense,
and military space research. It also provides air services in coordination
with the other military branches. U.S. military activities in the air began
with army use of balloons for reconnaissance during the Civil War and
the Spanish-American War; in 1907 the Aeronautical Division of the Sig-
nal Corps was created. In 1920 the Army Reorganization Act created the
Air Service (after 1926, Air Corps) as a unit of the Army; in 1941 it
became the Army Air Forces. In 1947 the independent U.S. Air Force was
created and became part of the newly created Department of Defense in
United States District Court In the U.S., any of the 94 trial courts
of general jurisdiction in the federal judicial system. Each state, as well
as the District of Columbia and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, has
at least one federal district court. Each court has at least one district judge
and can have more than a score of them, as well as a clerk, a U.S. attor-
ney, a U.S. marshal, one or more U.S. magistrates, bankruptcy judges,
probation officers, and other staff. Decisions of the district courts are nor-
mally subject to appeal, typically to the UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS for
the region in which the district court is located.
United States Marine Corps (USMC) Separate military service
within the U.S. Department of the Navy (see U.S. NAVY), charged with
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
1972 I United States Military Academy (cid:2) Universal Time
United States Military Academy known as West Point Institu-
ROBERT E. LEE, STONEWALL JACKSON, JEFFERSON DAVIS, JOHN PERSHING, DWIGHT D.
EISENHOWER, DOUGLAS MACARTHUR, OMAR BRADLEY, and GEORGE PATTON.
United States Naval Academy known as Annapolis Institution
TER NIMITZ, WILLIAM F. HALSEY, JR., A.A. MICHELSON, HYMAN RICKOVER, JIMMY
Unity (School of Christianity) Religious movement founded in
unity-of-science view See UNIFIED SCIENCE
Universal Declaration of Human Rights Declaration adopted by
ORGANIZATIONs such as AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL.
Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) Organi-
Universal Resource Locator See URL
Universal Serial Bus See USB
Universal Time Mean (solar) time of the Greenwich meridian (0° lon-
gitude). Universal Time replaced the designation GREENWICH MEAN TIME in
1928; since 1972 it has been based on international atomic time, a uni-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
FORCE, the ELECTROMAGNETIC FORCE, and GRAVITATION. Numerous theories have
been proposed for the origin and structure of the universe. See also BIG
BANG; COSMOLOGY; EXPANDING UNIVERSE; STEADY-STATE THEOR Y.
uracil
Urbino majolica
excreted. See also HEMATURIA; URINALYSIS; URINAR Y SYSTEM; URINATION.
Urmia,
Persian
Dary)cheh-ye
Or)miyyeh
Ürümqi
Uttar Pradesh
V-1 missile or flying bomb or buzz bomb German MISSILE of
dhas, those who were born as humans to propagate the DHARMA. Though
without canonical basis, Vairocana holds a special place in Tibetan BUD-
DHISM and has a special role in the AVATAMSAKA-SUTRA, in which he is the
solar buddha who is both the ultimate reality of the cosmos and the one
who pervades its component parts.
Vaisheshika
Valencia, Lake formerly Tacarigua
validity In LOGIC, the property of an argument consisting in the fact that
the truth of the premises logically guarantees the truth of the conclusion.
Whenever the premises are true, the conclusion must be true, because of
the form of the argument. Some arguments that fail to be valid are accept-
able on grounds other than formal logic (e.g., inductively strong argu-
ments), and their conclusions are supported with less than logical
necessity. Where the support yields high probability of the conclusion
relative to the premises, such arguments are sometimes called inductively
valid. In other purportedly persuasive arguments, the premises actually
provide no rational grounds for accepting the conclusion; such defective
forms of argument are called fallacies (see FALLACY, FORMAL AND INFORMAL).
valine
1984 I
value-added tax (cid:2) Van Cortlandt
VAT. See also REGRESSIVE TAX.
A globe valve controls the flow of a fluid through a pipe, inlet, or outlet. To stop the
flow completely, the threaded stem is turned to lower a sealing gasket onto the seat.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
COURTESY OF UNIVERSAL PICTURES; PHOTOGRAPH, THE
BETTMANN ARCHIVE
Bela Lugosi with Frances Dade in Drac-
ula (1931).
Van de Graaff, Robert J(emison) (b. Dec. 20, 1901, Tuscaloosa,
Ala., U.S.—d. Jan. 16, 1967, Boston, Mass.) U.S. physicist. He worked as
an engineer, then as a physics researcher at the University of Oxford (1925–
29). From 1931 he continued his research at MIT, as a professor (1934–60).
He developed a high-voltage electrostatic generator (later called the Van de
Graaff generator) that served as a type of PARTICLE ACCELERATOR. In 1946 he
cofounded the High Voltage Engineering Corp. to manufacture his accel-
erator. Widely used in atomic research, the device was also adapted to pro-
duce high-energy X rays for medical and industrial uses.
van de Velde, Henri See Henri van de VELDE
van de Velde, Willem, the Elder See Willem van de VELDE THE ELDER
van der Goes, Hugo See Hugo van der GOES
van der Rohe, Ludwig Mies See Ludwig MIES VAN DER ROHE
van der Waals
Vancouver
vapor lamp See ELECTRIC DISCHARGE LAMP
vaporization Conversion of a substance from the LIQUID or SOLID phase
into the gaseous (see GAS), or vapour, phase. It includes boiling, in which
vapour bubbles form in a liquid, and SUBLIMATION, in which a solid is con-
verted directly to vapour. Vaporization requires that HEAT (the substance’s
LATENT HEAT of vaporization) be supplied to the liquid or solid; the same
amount of heat is released by the substance in CONDENSATION, the reverse
of vaporization. If the surroundings do not supply enough heat, the tem-
perature of the remaining substance undergoing vaporization drops. See
also EVAPORATION.
Varanasi
variation In music, basic technique consisting of changing the music
melodically, harmonically, or contrapuntally. The simplest variation type
is the variation set, in which two or more sections are based on the same
musical material, which is treated with different variational techniques in
each section. The practice, originally involving use of a repeated bass line
(basso ostinato, or ground bass), began in early 16th-century dance music
in Italy and Spain. Ground-bass forms include the chaconne and passa-
caglia, both of which usually employ a brief bass line repeated many
times. In the 17th century, organ and harpsichord variations became a
standard form in Germany. Keyboard variations in the 19th century often
employed popular tunes or opera melodies; variation form was also com-
monly used in symphonies, quartets, and sonatas. It declined in impor-
tance after the classical era but has never ceased to be employed by
composers. The music of certain non-Western cultures also uses varia-
tional techniques. The art music of southern India is built on the concept
of a string of pieces, each a variation on a given “theme.” A somewhat
different concept of multilevel variation is found in the GAMELAN (orches-
tra) music of Indonesia. The variations are not consecutive but are simul-
taneous, a technique called heterophony.
varicella See CHICKEN POX
varicose
Vasconcelos
13th century by Pope Nicholas III. NICHOLAS V founded the Vatican
Library. Under JULIUS II, Giovanni dei Dolci built the SISTINE CHAPEL, noted
for its spectacular interior artwork including MICHELANGELO’s ceiling;
DONATO BRAMANTE completed the palace’s northern facade and planned the
immense Belvedere court; and RAPHAEL painted his masterpieces in the
palace. Antonio DA SANGALLO THE YOUNGER, employed by PAUL III, designed
the Sala Regia (Royal Hall) and Pauline Chapel, decorated by Michelan-
gelo. Several chapels, along with Ottaviano Mascherino’s famous Gallery
of Maps, date from the late 16th century. Domenico Fontana added a wing
of apartments and the present library building under SIXTUS V. In the
Baroque period, Urban VIII built the Matilda Chapel and, under Alex-
ander VII, GIAN LORENZO BERNINI built the Scala Regia (Royal Stairway).
Vatnajökull
Reuther board, a type of springboard, is placed in front of the near end of
the apparatus. The gymnast runs, gathers momentum while nearing the
apparatus, rebounds off the springboard, and, supporting the hands on the
apparatus, vaults over it and performs an acrobatic maneuver.
Vavilov
Vedanta
Velde
HEPPLEWHITE, and THOMAS SHERATON used mahogany and satinwood veneers.
By the mid-19th century mechanical saws allowed the veneering process
to be used in mass production to cover defects in cheap furniture.
Venera
Venice Biennale
Veracruz
Verga
vernier
also established the LEAGUE OF NATIONS, the INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZA-
TION, and the Permanent Court of International Justice (later the INTERNA-
TIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE). See also FOURTEEN POINTS.
vertebral
Vespucci
viburnum
Victoria Falls See IGUAZÚ FALLS
Victoria Island Second largest
island of the ARCTIC ARCHIPELAGO,
NORTHWEST TERRITORIES and the territory of NUNAVUT.
vicuña
board or is a separate circuit board, but is sometimes built into the com-
puter display unit. It contains a digital-to-analog module, as well as
MEMOR Y chips that store display data. All video cards (also known as video
adapters, video boards, and video controllers) adhere to a display stan-
dard, such as SVGA or XGA.
videocassette recorder See VCR
videodisc Rigid circular plate of either metal or plastic used to record
video and audio signals for playback. It resembles a phonograph record
and can be played on a machine attached to a conventional television
receiver. There are two major classes of videodiscs, magnetic and non-
magnetic. Magnetic videodiscs have an oxide-coated surface onto which
input signals are recorded as magnetic patterns in spiral tracks. Nonmag-
netic videodiscs use either a mechanical recording system analogous to
that used in phonograph records, or optical technology that uses a laser
to read data coded as a sequence of pits on the disc. The most common
type of videodisc today is the DVD.
videotape Magnetic tape used to record visual images and sound, or
the recording itself. There are two types of videotape recorders, the trans-
verse (or quad) and the helical. The transverse unit uses four heads rotat-
ing on an axis perpendicular to the direction in which the tape is fed. The
transverse format achieves 1,500-in.-per-minute head-to-tape speed, nec-
essary for high picture quality. The helical unit uses tape traveling around
a drum in the form of a helix. VCRS use a helical format, known as VHS
(Video Home System), consisting of two helical bands and tape 1/2 in.
(1 cm) wide.
Vidor
ments from the north. The Viet Cong’s guerrilla war against the South
Vietnamese government and its powerful U.S. allies was successful; the
U.S. withdrew its troops from Vietnam between 1969 and 1973, and the
PRG assumed power in South Vietnam in 1975, following a full-scale
invasion. It became part of a National United Front the following year.
Viet Minh
dancer and choreographer. He studied dance with his father and toured in
Spain (1788) and Vienna (1793–95, 1799–1803), where he began to cho-
reograph works in a style synthesizing dance and mime, similar to JEAN-
GEORGES NOVERRE’s ballet d’action, which he called “coreodramma.” He
created more than 40 works, including The Creatures of Prometheus
(1801), Gli strelizzi (1809), Otello (1818), and The Titans (1819). In 1811
he became ballet master at La Scala in Milan, where he promoted the
development of ballet in Italy.
Vigée-Lebrun
Villahermosa
was captured at sea by Barbary pirates but escaped. In 1625 he founded
the Congregation of the Mission (also called Lazarists or Vincentians) in
Paris as a preaching and teaching order. He also established the Confra-
ternities of Charity, associations of laywomen who nursed the sick. With
St. Louise de Marillac he cofounded the Daughters of Charity (Sisters of
Charity of St. Vincent de Paul).
Vincent of Beauvais
Viracocha
Virgo
INGTON’s MOUNT VERNON, THOMAS JEFFERSON’s MONTICELLO, Civil War
Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions (1788–89) Measures passed
by the legislatures of Virginia and Kentucky as a protest against the ALIEN
AND SEDITION ACTS. Drafted by JAMES MADISON and THOMAS JEFFERSON (though
PLYMOUTH COMPANY.
Virginia Declaration of Rights Measure adopted by the colony of
Virginia (June 12, 1776). Drafted by GEORGE MASON, it stated that “all
dichotomy between DEONTOLOGICAL ETHICS and CONSEQUENTIALISM: It agrees
with consequentialism that the criterion of an action’s being morally right
or wrong lies in its relation to an end that has intrinsic value, but more
closely resembles deontological ethics in its view that morally right
actions are constitutive of the end itself and not mere instrumental means
to the end. See also EUDAEMONISM.
Virunga
(1948), Senso (1954), Rocco and His Brothers (1960), The Leopard (1963,
Golden Palm), The Damned (1969), and Death in Venice (1971). As a
stage director, he introduced to Italy works by JEAN COCTEAU, ARTHUR MILLER,
and TENNESSEE WILLIAMS, and he staged operas starring MARIA CALLAS that
combined realism and spectacle.
viscosity
vitamin E or tocopherol
vizier
voir dire
Volga Tatar language See TATAR LANGUAGE
Volgograd formerly (until 1925) Tsaritsyn (1925–61) Stalingrad
City (pop., 2001 est.: 982,900), southwestern Russia. Located on the
VOLGA RIVER, it was founded as the fortress of Tsaritsyn in 1589. During
the RUSSIAN CIVIL WAR (1918–20), JOSEPH STALIN organized the city’s defense
against the White Russian armies, and it was later renamed in his honour.
During World War II it was reduced to rubble in the Battle of STALINGRAD;
it was rebuilt in the postwar era. Its manufactures include steel and alu-
minum, engineering products, timber goods, building materials, and food-
stuffs. A major railroad junction and river port, it is the eastern terminus
of the Volga-Don Ship Canal.
Volhynia
He kept up an immense correspondence and took an interest in any cases
of injustice, especially those resulting from religious prejudice. Voltaire
is remembered as a crusader against tyranny and bigotry and is noted for
his wit, satire, and critical capacity.
Volturno River
from using literacy tests to determine eligibility to vote. Later laws pro-
hibited literacy tests in all states and made poll taxes illegal in state and
local elections.
Voto, Bernard De See Bernard DE VOTO
Vouet
Vyshinsky
Waals, Johannes Diederik van der See Johannes D. VAN DER
WAALS
Wabash
century his undoubted musical stature was challenged somewhat by the
strongly racist and anti-Semitic views expressed in his writings, and evi-
dence of anti-Semitism in his operas was increasingly documented.
Wagner
ing that a business or private property “affected with a public interest”
was subject to governmental regulation.
Waitemata
entered the Austrian foreign service
and served successively as ambassa-
dor to Canada (1958–60) and the UN
(1964–68, 1970–71) and as foreign
minister (1968–70). Elected to suc-
ceed U THANT as UN secretary-
general, he served two terms, during
which he oversaw disaster relief in
Bangladesh, Nicaragua, and Guate-
mala and peacekeeping missions in
Cyprus,
the Middle East, Angola,
and Guinea. Denied a third term, he
returned to Austria and ran for presi-
dent in 1986. His candidacy became
controversial when it was learned
that he had been a member of the
Nazi Party and had served in a Ger-
man army unit
that had deported
most of the Jewish population of the
Greek town of Salonika to Nazi
death camps in 1943. Elected nonetheless, he was diplomatically isolated
throughout his term (1986–92).
Wales Welsh Cymru
RETAINING WALL, SHEAR WALL.
YORK STOCK EXCHANGE, the AMERICAN STOCK EXCHANGE, and the Federal
wallaby
Wallace, Henry A(gard) (b. Oct. 7, 1888, Adair county, Iowa,
U.S.—d. Nov. 18, 1965, Danbury, Conn.) U.S. politician. An agricultural
expert, he succeeded his father as editor of Wallace’s Farmer (1924–33).
In 1932 he helped FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT win Iowa. As U.S. secretary of
agriculture (1933–40), he shaped the administration’s farm policy, includ-
ing the AGRICULTURAL ADJUSTMENT ADMINISTRATION. He served as vice presi-
Wallace, Mike orig. Myron
wallaroo
Hand-printed wallpaper by Jean-
Baptiste Réveillon, c. 1780–90; in the
Victoria and Albert Museum, London.
COURTESY OF THE VICTORIA AND ALBERT MUSEUM,
LONDON; PHOTOGRAPH, THE COOPER-BRIDGEMAN
LIBRARY, LONDON
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Wallis (cid:2) Walpole
Walnut Canyon National Monument National monument,
north-central Arizona, U.S. Established in 1915 and covering an area of
3 sq mi (8 sq km), it preserves more than 300 pre-Columbian dwellings
built by the PUEBLO INDIANS in shallow caves on the canyon walls. Main
occupancy was from AD 1000 to 1200.
Walpole, Horace, 4th earl of Orford orig. Horatio Walpole
Walpole, Sir Hugh (Sey-
Horace Walpole, detail of an oil paint-
ing by Sir Joshua Reynolds, 1757; in
the City of Birmingham Museum and
Art Gallery, England.
COURTESY OF BIRMINGHAM MUSEUMS AND ART GALLERY
mour) (b. March 13, 1884, Auckland, N.Z.—d. June 1, 1941, near
Keswick, Cumberland, Eng.) British novelist, critic, and dramatist. A natu-
ral storyteller, Walpole turned to writing and reviewing books after unsuc-
cessful attempts at teaching and lay reading in the Anglican church.
Among his important novels is the semiautobiographical series that
includes Jeremy (1919), Jeremy and Hamlet (1923), and Jeremy at Crale
(1927). The Herries Chronicle, about an English country family, com-
prises Rogue Herries (1930), Judith Paris (1931), The Fortress (1932),
and Vanessa (1933). He also wrote critical works on ANTHONY TROLLOPE,
WALTER SCOTT, and JOSEPH CONRAD.
Walpole, Robert, 1st earl of Orford (b. Aug. 26, 1676, Houghton
Robert Walpole, detail of an oil paint-
ing by Sir Godfrey Kneller, c. 1710–
15; in the National Portrait Gallery,
London.
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY,
LONDON
Walras
CHOPIN, JOHANNES BRAHMS, and JOHANN STRAUSS.
Walvis Bay Town (pop., 2001 prelim.: 40,849), west-central Namibia,
on the Atlantic Ocean. A mid-19th-century rush to exploit GUANO depos-
its on nearby islands was followed by British annexation of the bay and
the adjacent land in 1878. It was incorporated into Britain’s Cape Colony
in 1884. In 1910 it was included in the newly united South Africa. Admin-
istered as part of South West Africa (1922–77), it was then governed
directly by South Africa, which retained the enclave after Namibia
reached independence in 1990. The two countries administered the
enclave jointly from 1992 to 1994; then South Africa transferred it to
Namibia. Its harbour serves as Namibia’s chief port.
wampum Tubular shell beads assembled into strings or woven into
belts or embroidered ornaments. The ALGONQUIAN word (short for wam-
pumpeag) translates as “string of white (shell beads).” Before contact with
white settlers, Indians used wampum primarily ceremonially or in GIFT
EXCHANGEs. In the early 17th century it came to be used as money in trade
with whites, because of a shortage of European currency.
Wanaka
CHWITZ and TREBLINKA. See also HOLOCAUST.
wapiti
Ward, Barbara (Mary), Baroness Jackson (of Lodsworth)
warfare See AIR WARFARE, AMPHIBIOUS WARFARE, BIOLOGICAL WARFARE, CHEMI-
CAL WARFARE, ECONOMIC WARFARE, HOLY WAR, NAVAL WARFARE, PSYCHOLOGICAL WAR-
FARE, TOTAL WAR, TRENCH WARFARE
warfarin
2030 I Warren (cid:2) Warsaw Uprising
Warren, Harry orig. Salvatore Guaragna (b. Dec. 24, 1893,
of BUNKER HILL.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Warring States period Chinese Zhangou (475–221 BC) In Chi-
Warsaw, Duchy of or Grand Duchy of Warsaw Independent
Warsaw Pact or Warsaw Treaty Organization Military alli-
wart or verruca
coeducational in 1984. It has an undergraduate college, a law school, and
a school of commerce, economics, and politics. Among its offerings are
programs in engineering, environmental studies, and journalism.
Washington Birthplace National Monument, George See
GEORGE WASHINGTON BIRTHPLACE NATIONAL MONUMENT
Washita
Washington, Dinah orig. Ruth Lee Jones (b. Aug. 29, 1924, Tus-
test for the antibody to the spirochete that causes syphilis in 1906. That
test, along with other procedures, is still used to diagnose syphilis. He is
also noted for developing tests for tuberculosis. With Wilhelm Kolle he
wrote Handbook of Pathogenic Microorganisms (6 vol., 1903–09).
Wassermann
2034 I water moccasin (cid:2) watercress
Santa Cruz water lily (Victoria
cruziana).
GOTTLIEB HAMPFLER
water ouzel See DIPPER
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
PLUMBING.
water table or groundwater table Surface of a body of under-
Seasonal variations in groundwater levels.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
Wateree River (cid:2) Waterton Lakes National Park
Waters, Muddy orig. McKinley Morganfield (b. April 4, 1915,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Watie
Watusi See TUTSI
Waugh
2038 I waxwing (cid:2) weathering
Wayne, John orig. Marion Michael Morrison (b. May 26, 1907,
WCTU See WOMAN’S CHRISTIAN TEMPERANCE UNION
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
weapon of mass destruction (WMD) Weapon with the capacity
Weapons Convention of 1993. See NUCLEAR WEAPON; CHEMICAL WARFARE; BIO-
LOGICAL WARFARE.
JOHN H. GERARD
Long-tailed weasel (Mustela longi-
cauda)
WARMING, GREENHOUSE EFFECT).
Webber, Andrew Lloyd See Andrew LLOYD WEBBER
Weber
Webb, Sidney (James) and Beatrice Beatrice Webb orig. Mar-
LEGE CASE, MCCULLOCH V. MAR YLAND,
from those of WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.
Lake See Lake CHARGOGGAGOGGMANCHAUGGAUGGAG-
OGGCHAUBUNAGUNGAMAUGG
Webster,
Wedekind
mental in WILLIAM SEWARD’s election as governor (1838) and in the presi-
dential election of WILLIAM H. HARRISON (1840). He later became active in
the Republican Party and was a staunch supporter of Pres. ABRAHAM LIN-
COLN. In 1861 he was sent to England to seek support for the Union.
Weelkes
Weights and Measurements1 (British Imperial System/U.S. Customary System)
ABBREVIATION
OR SYMBOL
EQUIVALENTS IN OTHER UNITS
OF SAME SYSTEM
METRIC EQUIVALENT
short ton
long ton
hundredweight
short hundredweight
long hundredweight
pound
ounce
grain
pound
ounce
pennyweight
grain
pound
ounce
scruple
grain
gallon
quart
fluid ounce
fluid dram
minim
bushel
quart
bushel
gallon
quart
fluid ounce
fluid dram
minim
square mile
square rod
square yard
square foot
square inch
cubic yard
cubic foot
cubic inch
WEIGHT
Avoirdupois2
20 short hundredweight, 2000 pounds
20 long hundredweight, 2240 pounds
100 pounds, 0.05 short tons
112 pounds, 0.05 long ton
16 ounces, 7000 grains
16 drams, 437.5 grains, 0.0625 pound
27.344 grains, 0.0625 ounce
0.037 dram, 0.002286 ounce
12 ounces, 240 pennyweight, 5760 grains
20 pennyweight, 480 grains, 0.083 pound
24 grains, 0.05 ounce
0.042 pennyweight, 0.002083 ounce
Apothecaries’
12 ounces, 5760 grains
8 drams, 480 grains, 0.083 pound
3 scruples, 60 grains
20 grains, 0.333 dram
0.05 scruple, 0.002083 ounce, 0.0166 dram
CAPACITY
U.S. liquid measure
5280 feet, 1760 yards, 320 rods
5.50 yards, 16.5 feet
3 feet, 36 inches
12 inches, 0.333 yard
0.083 foot, 0.028 yard
640 acres, 102,400 square rods
4840 square yards, 43,560 square feet
30.35 square yards, 0.00625 acre
1296 square inches, 9 square feet
144 square inches, 0.111 square yard
0.0069 square foot, 0.00077 square yard
VOLUME
27 cubic feet, 46,656 cubic inches
1728 cubic inches, 0.0370 cubic yard
0.00058 cubic foot, 0.000021 cubic yard
lb or lb avdp also #
oz or oz avdp
dr or dr avdp
dwt also pwt
lb ap
oz ap
dr ap
fl oz
fl dr
fl oz
fl dr
ft or ‘
in or “ 
sq mi or mi2
sq rd or rd2
sq yd or yd2
sq ft or ft2
sq in or in2
cu yd or yd3
cu ft or ft3
cu in or in3
0.907 metric ton 
1.016 metric ton 
45.359 kilograms 
50.802 kilograms 
0.454 kilogram 
28.350 grams 
1.772 grams 
0.0648 gram 
0.373 kilogram 
31.103 grams 
1.555 grams 
0.0648 gram 
0.373 kilogram 
31.103 grams 
3.888 grams 
1.296 grams 
0.0648 gram 
3.785 liters 
0.946 liter 
473.176 milliliters 
118.294 milliliters 
29.573 milliliters 
3.697 milliliters 
0.061610 milliliter 
35.239 liters 
8.810 liters 
1.101 liters 
0.551 liter 
36.369 liters 
9.092 liters 
4.546 liters 
1.136 liters 
568.26 milliliters 
142.066 milliliters 
28.412 milliliters 
3.5516 milliliters 
0.059194 milliliter 
1.609 kilometers 
5.029 meters 
0.9144 meter 
30.48 centimeters 
2.54 centimeters 
2.590 square kilometers 
0.405 hectare, 4047 square meters 
25.293 square meters 
0.836 square meter 
0.093 square meter 
6.452 square centimeters 
0.765 cubic meter 
0.028 cubic meter 
16.387 cubic centimeters
1For U.S. equivalents of the metric unit see Metric System table.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
2The U.S. uses the avoirdupois units as a common system of measuring weight.
Weimar Republic
Welles
poor (see MEDICARE AND MEDICAID).
SURPLUS; VILFREDO PARETO.
Welfare Island See ROOSEVELT ISLAND
Welfare Party See REFAH PARTY
as the RAILWAY EXPRESS AGENCY and its foreign express business by AMERI-
CAN EXPRESS CO. Its security services still exist under the name Wells Fargo
Armored Service Corp., a subsidiary of Baker Industries. The Wells Fargo
Bank’s holding company, Wells Fargo & Co., was established in 1968.
Headquartered in San Francisco, the bank has subsidiaries and affiliates
worldwide. In 1998 Wells Fargo & Co. merged with Norwest Corp.
Welsh corgi
Wells, Ida B(ell) or Ida Bell Wells-Barnett (b. July 16, 1862,
Wells, Kitty orig. Muriel Ellen Deason (b. Aug. 30, 1919, Nash-
LORETTA LYNN.
Wenceslas
followers as WASHINGTON ALLSTON, GILBERT STUART, CHARLES WILLSON PEALE,
Wesley (cid:2) West Indies
West, Nathanael orig. Nathan Weinstein (b. Oct. 17, 1903, New
York, N.Y., U.S.—d. Dec. 22, 1940, near El Centro, Calif.) U.S. writer.
He attended Brown University and was supporting himself as a hotel
manager, giving free or low-rent rooms to struggling fellow writers, when
he wrote the novella Miss Lonelyhearts (1933), about an advice colum-
nist whose attempts to solace his correspondents end in ironic defeat. A
Cool Million (1934) mocks the American dream as popularized by HOR-
ATIO ALGER. His last novel, The Day of the Locust (1939), depicts the sav-
agery lurking beneath the Hollywood dream. Though not widely read until
after his death in an auto accident at age 37, West is now considered a
major American novelist.
West, Dame Rebecca orig. Cicily Isabel Fairfield (b. Dec. 21,
West Atlantic languages See ATLANTIC LANGUAGES
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
BONAPARTE and EXMOUTH gulfs. AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINAL peoples have occu-
Western Dvina River Russian Zapadnaya
JAMAICA, HISPANIOLA (HAITI and the DOMINICAN REPUBLIC), and PUERTO RICO; the
West Point See UNITED STATES MILITAR Y ACADEMY
West River See XI RIVER
Western Ontario, University
of Public university in London,
Ontario, Canada, founded in 1878. It
has faculties of applied health sci-
ences, arts, business administration,
dentistry,
education,
engineering,
graduate studies,
journalism,
library science, medicine, music,
nursing, science, and social science
as well as a graduate school of jour-
nalism.
Western Reserve Tract of land,
northeastern Ohio, U.S. Located on
the southern shore of Lake ERIE, it
formed part of the western lands of
Connecticut not surrendered to Congress in 1786. It covered about
3,500,000 ac (1,417,500 ha) and was sold in part to immigrants from
Connecticut (1786–1800). Ceded in 1800 to Ohio, it was later divided
into several counties.
Western Sahara formerly Spanish Sahara Territory, North
Africa. Area: 97,344 sq mi (252,120 sq km). Population (2002 est.):
256,000. Capital: LAAYOUNE. Little is known of the area’s prehistory,
though rock engravings in southern locations suggest a succession of
nomadic groups. In the 4th century BC there was trade across the Medi-
terranean Sea between the region and Europe; this did not last, and there
was little European contact until the 19th century. In 1884 Spain claimed
a protectorate over the RÍO DE ORO region. Boundary agreements with
France were concluded in 1900 and 1912. Spain formally united the area’s
northern and southern parts into the overseas province of the Spanish
Sahara in 1958. In 1976 Spain relinquished its claim. The region then was
divided between Mauritania, which relinquished its claim in 1979, and
Morocco, which later occupied the whole territory. Separatists of the
POLISARIO movement, based in Algeria, declared a government-in-exile
called the Saharan Arab Democratic Republic in 1976; the issue of West-
ern Sahara’s status remained unresolved. remained unresolved.Western
Sahara has vast phosphate deposits and some potash and iron ore.
Western Samoa See SAMOA
Western Scheldt or Westerschelde
tion of the Reformed (Calvinist) Church. The Holy Roman Empire was
forced to recognize its German princes as absolute sovereigns in their own
dominions, which greatly weakened its central authority.
Wetar
down in 1245 by Henry III (except for the nave) and replaced with the
present Gothic-style abbey church. The rebuilding of the nave was begun
by 1376 and continued intermittently until Tudor times. The chapel of
Henry VII (begun c. 1503) is noted for its exquisite fan vaulting. ELIZA-
BETH I refounded the church as the Collegiate Church of St. Peter in West-
minster (1560). The western towers (1745), by Nicholas Hawksmoor and
John James, were the last addition. Every British sovereign since Will-
iam the Conqueror has been crowned in the abbey except Edward V and
Edward VIII. Many are also buried there, and it is crowded with the tombs
and memorials to other famous Britons. Part of the southern transept is
known as the Poets’ Corner, while the northern transept has memorials
to statesmen.
Westminster Confession Confession of faith of English-speaking
Presbyterians, representing a theological consensus of international CAL-
VINISM. Produced by the Westminster Assembly, it was completed in 1646
and approved by Parliament in 1648. When the monarchy was restored
in 1660, the episcopal form of church government was reinstated and the
Confession lost official status in England, but it had already been adopted
by the Church of Scotland (1647) and various other churches. Consisting
of 33 chapters, it states that the sole doctrinal authority is scripture,
restates the doctrines of the Holy TRINITY and JESUS, and gives reformed
views of the SACRAMENTS, the ministry, and GRACE. See also PRESBYTERIANISM.
Weston, Edward (b. March 24, 1886, Highland Park, Ill., U.S.—d.
Jan. 1, 1958, Carmel, Calif.) U.S.
photographer. A camera enthusiast
from boyhood, Weston began his
professional career by opening a por-
trait studio in Glendale, Calif. His
early work was in the style of the
Pictorialists, photographers who imi-
tated IMPRESSIONIST paintings. In 1915
Weston saw an exhibition of modern
art that inspired him to renounce his
former work: he began to create
sharp and realistic pictures that con-
vey the beauty of natural objects
through skillful composition and
subtleties of tone, light, and texture.
After traveling and meeting luminar-
ies such as ALFRED STIEGLITZ and DIEGO
Whewell
Wharton, Edith (Newbold) orig. Edith Newbold Jones (b.
2052 I whip-tailed ray (cid:2) White
nominee in the 1852 election, WINFIELD SCOTT, failed to win wide support
as most Southern Whigs joined the DEMOCRATIC PARTY. In 1854 most North-
ern Whigs joined the new REPUBLICAN PARTY, though some joined the KNOW-
NOTHING PARTY.
whip-tailed ray See STINGRAY
whippet Breed of HOUND dog developed in 19th-century Britain to chase
rabbits in an arena. It was developed
from TERRIERS and English and Italian
GREYHOUNDS, which it resembles. It
stands 18–22 in. (46–56 cm), weighs
about 28 lbs (13 kg), and has a
smooth coat of gray, tan, or white.
Capable of speeds up to 35 mph (56
kph), it is used for racing and for
hunting small game. It is typically
quiet and even-tempered.
Whipple, George H(oyt) (b.
Whippet
SALLY ANNE THOMPSON/EB INC.
secretary, Orville E. Babcock, was indicted but acquitted on Grant’s tes-
timony. The Republican Party allegedly received some of the illegally
held tax money.
whist Card game. It belongs to a family that includes bridge whist and
bridge, each of which developed in succession from the original game of
whist. The essential features of card games in the whist family are: four
people usually play, two against two as partners; a full 52-card deck is dealt
out evenly so that each player holds 13 cards; the object of play is to win
tricks, and win or loss is determined by the number of tricks taken (as dis-
tinct from games such as PINOCHLE, in which it is determined by the value of
card points taken in tricks). Whist originated in 17th-century England.
whistler See GOLDENEYE
Whistler, James (Abbott) McNeill (b. July 14, 1834, Lowell,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
White, James (Springer) and Ellen (Gould) orig. Ellen Gould
ADMINISTRATION. In 1946 he studied with EDWARD WESTON and ALFRED STIEG-
White, Patrick (Victor Martindale) (b. May 28, 1912, London,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
White (cid:2) White House
white blood cell See LEUKOCYTE
CHR LEDERER-BAVARIA-VERLAG
White butterfly (Pieris brassicae).
white-footed mouse See DEER MOUSE
2054 I White Lotus (cid:2) Whitman
than 100 rooms. The British burned it in 1814, but it was rebuilt and
enlarged under Hoban’s direction. In the 1820s, Hoban added eastern and
western terraces as well as a semicircular southern portico and a colon-
naded northern portico. The later addition of the West Wing (1902) and
East Wing (1942) provided additional office space. THEODORE ROOSEVELT
adopted “White House” as the building’s official name in 1902. Its pub-
lic areas are toured by about 1.5 million people every year.
White Lotus Chinese Buddhist millenarian movement that was often
persecuted because of its association with rebellion. The movement had
roots in 4th-century worship of the Buddha AMITABHA, whose devotional
cult inspired Mao Ziyuan to form the White Lotus Society, a pious veg-
etarian group of monks and laity. By the 14th century it had developed
into a millenarian sect that combined MAITREYAn and MANICHAEAN beliefs
and was active in rebellions at the end of the YUAN DYNASTY. The society
became most prominent through its role in the White Lotus Rebellion
(1786–1804), a large-scale uprising in central China that contributed to
the fall of the Qing dynasty. It was eventually put down by peasants orga-
nized into local militia defense corps. Later Chinese governments came
to use the term White Lotus for all illegal millenarian groups. Some
observers saw the NIAN REBELLION of 1852 as well as the secret society
behind the Boxer Rebellion as new manifestations of the White Lotus
Society.
White Monk See CISTERCIAN
White Mountain, Battle of (1620) Decisive battle near Prague at
the beginning of the THIRTY YEARS’ WAR. The Catholic forces of MAXIMILIAN
I, duke of Bavaria, commanded by count von TILLY, defeated the Protes-
tant forces of FREDERICK V, king of Bohemia. By the defeat, Bohemia lost
its independence, and Protestantism was exterminated until 1648.
White Mountains Segment of the APPALACHIAN MOUNTAINS. It extends
87 mi (140 km) across north-central New Hampshire and into western
Maine. Containing the highest elevations in the northeastern U.S., its
loftiest peaks, mostly 5,000–6,000 ft (1,500–1,800 m) high, occur in a
series of summits that are named for U.S. presidents and make up the
Presidential Range. The highest point is Mount WASHINGTON. Most of the
White Mountains lie within the White Mountain National Forest. It is a
popular summer and winter resort area.
White Nile See NILE RIVER
White Sands National Monument National monument, south-
white shark See GREAT WHITE SHARK
white-tailed deer or Virginia
deer Common reddish brown DEER
(Odocoileus virginianus), an impor-
tant game animal found alone or in
small groups from southern Canada
to South America. The tail, white on
the underside, is held aloft when the
deer is alarmed or running. The male
has forwardly curved antlers with
several unbranched tines. Northern
white-tailed deer grow up to 3.5 ft
(107 cm) tall and weigh up to 400 lbs
(180 kg). The white-tailed deer lives
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
White-tailed deer buck (Odocoileus
virginianus)
KARL H. MASLOWSKI
See also WHITEFISH.
Whitman, Marcus (b. Sept. 4, 1802, Rushville, N.Y., U.S.—d. Nov.
29, 1847, Waiilatpu, Oregon Territory) U.S. missionary and pioneer. A
physician and Congregational missionary, he was sent to the Oregon
region after offering his services to the American Board of Commission-
ers for Foreign Missions. In 1836 he and his wife founded a mission
among the Cayuse Indians near present-day Walla Walla, Wash. He helped
the Indians build houses and a corn-grinding mill, and his wife opened a
Walt Whitman, photograph by
Mathew Brady.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, WASHINGTON, D.C.
PABLO NERUDA, FERNANDO PESSOA, and ALLEN GINSBERG.
important AMERICAN SYSTEM OF MANUFACTURE.
Whitney, Gertrude Vanderbilt orig. Gertrude Vanderbilt (b.
Jan. 9, 1875, New York, N.Y., U.S.—d. April 18, 1942, New York City)
U.S. sculptor and art patron. Great-granddaughter of CORNELIUS VANDERBILT,
she was born to great wealth and studied sculpture in New York City and
Paris. Among her major works were the Titanic Memorial (1914–31) in
Washington, D.C., and Victory Arch (1918–19) in New York. All her works
were simple, direct, and traditional. In 1929 she offered to donate her col-
lection of about 500 works by modern American artists to the Metropolitan
Museum of Art but was refused by the traditionalist director. The next year
she founded the Whitney Museum of American Art, also in New York City,
which opened in 1931; today it is the foremost museum of American art.
Whitney, John Hay (b. Aug. 17, 1904, Ellsworth, Maine, U.S.—d.
Feb. 8, 1982, Manhasset, N.Y.) U.S. multimillionaire and sportsman. The
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Whitman (cid:2) wholesaling
Whittington, Richard known as Dick Whittington (d. March
WHO See WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
There are three major categories of wholesalers. Merchant wholesalers,
the most important category, are independent businesses that buy mer-
chandise in great quantities from manufacturers and resell it to retailers.
Manufacturers’ sales branches are businesses founded by manufacturers
to sell directly to retailers. Merchandise agents and brokers represent
various manufacturers; they usually do not buy the merchandise they
handle but instead arrange for shelf space and the display of merchandise.
So-called warehouse stores sell large quantities of goods at near-wholesale
prices. See also RETAILING.
whooping cough or pertussis Acute, very contagious childhood
disease, typically with bouts of coughing followed by a long, loud inha-
lation (whoop) and ending with mucus expulsion and often vomiting.
Caused by the bacterium Bordetella pertussis, it initially resembles a cold
with a short dry cough. Within one or two weeks, coughing bouts begin;
this phase usually lasts four to six weeks. Serious complications include
bronchopneumonia (PNEUMONIA involving the bronchi), asphyxia, seizures,
and signs of brain damage. Treatment is with antibiotics. The pertussis
vaccine is usually combined with tetanus and diphtheria toxoids as part
of routine childhood immunizations.
whooping crane Migratory North American bird (Grus americana)
and one of the world’s rarest birds,
on the verge of extinction. The tall-
est North American bird, it is almost
5 ft (150 cm) tall and has a wing-
spread of about 7 ft (210 cm). It is
white with black-tipped wings, black
legs, and a bare red face and crown.
Its shrill, whooping call can be heard
for 2 miles (3 km). Almost extermi-
nated in the early 20th century, it
became the object of intensive con-
servation efforts; by century’s end
there were still fewer than 300 wild
and captive individuals. See also
SANDHILL CRANE.
Whorf
Wiesel
2058 I Wild West Show (cid:2) Wilhelmina
Wilde, Oscar (Fingal O’Flahertie Wills) (b. Oct. 16, 1854, Dub-
COURTESY OF THE WILLIAM ANDREWS MEMORIAL LIBRARY
OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, LOS ANGELES
Oscar Wilde, 1882.
wildebeest See GNU
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
jects and his biting indictments of hypocrisy, he also directed The Lost
Weekend (1945, Academy Award), Sunset Boulevard (1950, Academy
Award for best screenplay), Stalag 17 (1953), and The Apartment (1960,
Academy Award). His acclaimed comedies include Sabrina (1954), The
Seven Year Itch (1955), Some Like It Hot (1959), and Kiss Me, Stupid
(1964).
Wilder, Laura Ingalls orig. Laura Ingalls (b. Feb. 7, 1867, Lake
VERSITY, CONSERVATION, ENDANGERED SPECIES.
Wilhelmina (Helena Pauline Maria) (b. Aug. 31, 1880, The
Hague, Neth.—d. Nov. 28, 1962, Het Loo, near Apeldoorn) Queen of The
Netherlands (1890–1948). Daughter of King WILLIAM III, she became queen
on his death, under her mother’s regency until 1898, and soon gained wide
popular approval. She helped maintain her country’s neutrality in World
War I. After Germany invaded The Netherlands in 1940, she left with her
Willemstad
Wilkins, Maurice (Hugh Frederick) (b. Dec. 15, 1916, Pongaroa,
N.Z.—d. Oct. 6, 2004, London, Eng.) New Zealand-born British bio-
physicist. Educated in Birmingham and Cambridge, he participated in the
MANHATTAN PROJECT, working on the separation of uranium isotopes for use
in the atomic bomb. On his return to Britain, he began a series of inves-
tigations that led ultimately to his studies of DNA. His X-ray diffraction
studies of DNA proved crucial to the determination of DNA’s molecular
structure by JAMES D. WATSON and FRANCIS CRICK, for which the three were
awarded a 1962 Nobel Prize. He later applied X-ray diffraction techniques
to the study of RNA. See also ROSALIND FRANKLIN.
Wilkins, Roy (b. Aug. 30, 1901, St. Louis, Mo., U.S.—d. Sept. 8, 1981,
New York, N.Y.) U.S. civil-rights leader. He was a reporter for the Afri-
can American-owned Kansas City Call and later became its managing
editor. He joined the staff of the NAACP (1931) and became editor (1934–
49) of its official publication, The Crisis. In 1955 he began a 22-year ten-
ure as executive director of the NAACP, which he set on a course of
seeking equal rights through legal redress. He helped organize the 1963
March on Washington, and he served as chairman of the U.S. delegation
to the International Conference on Human Rights in 1968.
Wilkinson, James (b. 1757, Calvert county, Md.—d. Dec. 28, 1825,
Mexico City, Mex.) American army
officer and double agent. He served in
the AMERICAN REVOLUTION under HORA-
TIO GATES and was involved in the
THOMAS CONWAY cabal. He settled in
Kentucky in 1784 and schemed to
ally the Kentucky region with Spain,
though he was in fact working
against Spain. He served as governor
of part of the Louisiana territory
(1805–06). He allegedly planned to
conquer the Mexican provinces of
Spain and conspired with AARON BURR
to establish an independent govern-
ment; when he betrayed Burr’s plan,
he was investigated but cleared. In
the War of 1812 he commanded U.S.
forces on the Canadian border, but his
campaign against Montreal failed.
Wilkinson, John (b. 1728, Clif-
ton, Cumberland, Eng.—d. July 14,
1808, Bradley, Staffordshire) British
industrialist. Known as “the great
Staffordshire ironmaster,” he found many new applications for iron, devel-
embourg (1840–49). Son of WILLIAM I, he lived in exile with his family in
England from 1795. He commanded Dutch troops in the Battle of WATER-
LOO (1815). Sent by his father to Belgium in 1830 to appease the rebels,
he failed to stop the independence movement. In 1840 he became king
of The Netherlands on his father’s abdication. As king, he helped stabi-
lize the economy. In 1848 he oversaw passage of a new liberal constitu-
tion that expanded the authority of the ministers and assembly, established
direct elections, and secured basic civil liberties.
William III Dutch Willem Hendrik (b. Nov. 14, 1650, The Hague,
United Provinces of the Netherlands—d. March 19, 1702, London, Eng.)
Stadtholder of the United Provinces of the Netherlands (1672–1702) and
king of England (1689–1702). Son of WILLIAM II, prince of Orange, and
Mary Stuart, daughter of CHARLES I of England, he was born in The Hague
soon after his father’s death. The Act of Seclusion (1654) that barred the
house of Orange from power in the United Provinces was rescinded in
1660, and William was appointed captain general and named stadtholder
by popular acclaim in 1672. He successfully defended his country against
CHARLES II of England and LOUIS XIV of France. In 1677 he married Mary
(later Queen MAR Y II), daughter of the English duke of York (later JAMES
II). In 1688 William was invited by James’s opponents to intervene against
the Catholic ruler, and he landed with a Dutch army in Devon, Eng. He
and Mary were proclaimed joint rulers of England in 1689; he ruled alone
after Mary’s death in 1694. He directed the European opposition to Louis
XIV, which eventually led to the War of the GRAND ALLIANCE after Will-
iam’s death. In Britain he secured religious toleration and strengthened
Parliament, granting independence to the judiciary in the Act of SETTLE-
MENT.
William III Dutch Willem Alexander Paul Frederik Lodewijk
MONROE, JOHN TYLER, and Gen. WINFIELD SCOTT. GEORGE WASHINGTON was the
William of Auvergne
King of The Netherlands and grand duke of Luxembourg (1815–40). Son
of William V, prince of Orange, he married in 1791 and immigrated with
his family to England after the French invasion of the Dutch Republic
(1795). He sided with Prussia against NAPOLEON and lived in exile at the
Prussian court until 1812. After the Dutch revolt against French rule, he
became sovereign prince of the Dutch Republic (1813) and king of the
United Netherlands (1815), which included Belgium, Liège, and Luxem-
bourg. He led an economic recovery program that sparked a commercial
revival, but his autocratic methods and imposition of Dutch as the offi-
cial language provoked a revolt by Belgium (1830) that led to its inde-
pendence. In 1840 he abdicated in favour of his son, WILLIAM II.
William I known as William the Lion (b. 1143—d. Dec. 2, 1214,
Stirling, Stirlingshire, Scot.) King of Scotland (1165–1214). He succeeded
his father as earl of Northumberland (1152) but was forced to relinquish
his earldom to England’s HENR Y II in 1157. He succeeded his brother, Mal-
colm IV, as king of Scotland and in 1173 joined a revolt of Henry’s sons
in an attempt to regain Northumberland. Captured in 1174, he was
released after submitting to Henry’s overlordship. He bought his release
from subjection in 1189. He continued to agitate for the restoration of
Northumberland but was forced to renounce his claim by King JOHN in
1209. William created many of the major burghs of modern Scotland.
William II or William Rufus (b. c. 1056—d. Aug. 2, 1100, near
Lyndhurst, Hampshire, Eng.) King of England (1087–1100) and de facto
duke of Normandy (1096–1100). He inherited England from his father,
WILLIAM I (the Conqueror), and quelled a rebellion (1088) by barons loyal
to his brother ROBERT II. A tyrannical ruler, he brutally punished the lead-
ers of a second revolt (1095). He forced St. ANSELM, archbishop of Can-
terbury, to leave England and seized his lands (1097). He reduced the
Scottish kings to vassals (1093), subjugated Wales (1097), and waged war
on Normandy (1089–96), gaining control when Robert mortgaged the
duchy. His death in a hunting accident may have been an assassination
ordered by his brother Henry (later HENR Y I).
William II German Friedrich Wilhelm Viktor Albert known as
William II Italian Guglielmo known as William the Good (b.
William II Dutch Willem Frederik George Lodewijk (b. Dec.
6, 1792, The Hague, United Provinces of the Netherlands—d. March 17,
1849, Tilburg, Neth.) King of The Netherlands and grand duke of Lux-
was appointed in 1231 by Pope GREGOR Y IX to a council to censor the works
of ARISTOTLE (which in 1210 had been deemed corruptive of Christianity)
included in the university’s curriculum. Seeing no reason to avoid the ratio-
nal analysis of Christian revelation, he was on the verge of reorganizing the
curriculum when he died. In his principal work, usually called the Summa
aurea (written 1215–20), he treated such matters as God’s triune nature, the
problem of human choice, and the nature of virtue.
William of Ockham See William of OCKHAM
William Rufus See WILLIAM II (ENGLAND)
William Tell See William TELL
William the Conqueror See WILLIAM I (ENGLAND)
William the Good See WILLIAM II (SICILY)
William the Silent See WILLIAM I (NETHERLANDS)
Williams, Hank orig. Hiram King Williams (b. Sept. 17, 1923,
William of Ockham (cid:2) Williams
Williams, Mary Lou orig. Mary Elfrieda Scruggs (b. May 8,
1910, Atlanta, Ga., U.S.—d. May 28, 1981, Durham, N.C.) U.S. pianist,
composer, arranger, and bandleader. A child prodigy, she had her profes-
sional debut with big bands at age 12. Beginning in 1929, Williams wrote
arrangements for many SWING bands, including those of Andy Kirk (1898–
1992) and DUKE ELLINGTON. Her 12-movement Zodiac Suite was performed
by the New York Philharmonic in 1946. A pianist with strong roots in the
BLUES and early JAZZ, Williams embraced the innovations of BEBOP and later
free jazz, performing with a diverse array of jazz musicians, including
DIZZY GILLESPIE and Cecil Taylor (b. 1933). In the 1960s and ’70s she com-
posed a number of liturgical pieces for jazz ensembles, including Music
for Peace (1970), popularly known as “Mary Lou’s Mass.”
Williams, Ralph Vaughan See Ralph VAUGHAN WILLIAMS
Williams, Ted orig. Theodore Samuel Williams (b. Aug. 30,
Williams, Tennessee orig. Thomas Lanier Williams (b. March
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Williams, Venus; and Williams, Serena (respectively b. June
KAZAN.
Wills, Helen (Newington) or Helen Wills Moody in full Helen
TILOVA.
William’s War, King See KING WILLIAM’S WAR
Wilmot Proviso
Williamsburg City (pop., 2000: 11,998), southeastern Virginia, U.S.
Located on a tidewater peninsula between the JAMES and York rivers, it
was settled in 1633 as Middle Plantation and served as a refuge from
Indian attacks. The College of WILLIAM AND MAR Y was founded there in
1693. After the burning of nearby JAMESTOWN in 1699, it became the capi-
tal of Virginia until 1780, when the capital was moved to RICHMOND. Dur-
ing the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR, Confederate forces were defeated at the Battle
of Williamsburg in 1862. Colonial Williamsburg, an extensive restoration
of several hundred colonial buildings, was begun in 1926 and became part
of the COLONIAL NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK in 1936.
Wilson, C(harles) T(homson) R(ees) (b. Feb. 14, 1869, Glencorse,
Edmund Wilson
ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
Wilson, C. (cid:2) Wilson, R.
tions caused by 20th-century human activities. In Consilience: The Unity
of Knowledge (1998) he proposed that all of existence can be organized
and understood in accordance with a few fundamental natural laws.
Wilson, (James) Harold, Baron Wilson (of Rievaulx) (b.
Wilson, Harriet E. orig. Harriet E. Adams (b. 1828?, Milford,
J.M.W. TURNER and JOHN CONSTABLE.
Wilson, Robert W(oodrow) (b. Jan. 10, 1936, Houston, Texas,
U.S.) U.S. radio astronomer. He joined Bell Laboratories in 1963 and
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
headed its Radio Physics Research Department (1976–94). With his col-
league ARNO PENZIAS, he detected the COSMIC BACKGROUND RADIATION, a dis-
covery for which the two men shared a 1978 Nobel Prize (with Pyotr
Kapitsa [1894–1984], who was honoured for research unrelated to theirs).
Wilson, Teddy orig. Theodore Shaw Wilson (b. Nov. 24, 1912,
WALLER, EARL HINES, and ART TATUM.
Wilson disease or hepatolenticular
also AERODYNAMICS.
Windermere Lake, northwestern England. Located in the southeastern
LAKE DISTRICT, it is the country’s largest lake, 10.5 mi (17 km) long and 1
mi (1.6 km) wide; its area is 6 sq mi (16 sq km). It has a maximum depth
of 219 ft (67 m). Part of the Lake District National Park, it is a popular
tourist centre.
Windhoek
2066 I windpipe (cid:2) Windward Islands
before it was renamed in 1836. With
strategic
location
opposite
Detroit, it became an industrial cen-
tre, an important railway terminus,
and a busy port in GREAT LAKES ship-
ping. Its manufactures include motor
vehicles and parts, foods and bever-
ages, and medicines. It is Canada’s
leading port of entry from the U.S.
formerly
Windsor, house of
(1901–17) House of Saxe-
Coburg-Gotha Royal house of
Britain, which succeeded the house
of HANOVER on the death of its last
monarch, Queen VICTORIA. The dynas-
tic name of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was
that of Victoria’s German-born hus-
band, Prince ALBERT. The dynasty has
included EDWARD VII, GEORGE V,
EDWARD VIII, GEORGE VI, and ELIZABETH
II. In view of the anti-German atmo-
sphere of World War I, George V pro-
claimed in 1917 that all British male
descendants of Queen Victoria would
adopt the surname of Windsor.
Windsor, Wallis Warfield,
Matching a specific air temperature (columns) with a wind speed (rows) will show the wind chill equivalent and the approxi-
mate time to frostbite.
ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Winnebago
2068 I Winston-Salem (cid:2) Wister
Wintergreen (Gaultheria procumbens)
ROGER AND JOY SPURR—BRUCE COLEMAN INC./EB INC.
MASSACHUSETTS BAY COLONY. In 1629
he joined the Massachusetts Bay
Co., and he was elected governor of
the colony that was to be established
by the company in New England. An
ardent Puritan, he envisioned a
colony based on his religious beliefs.
He guided the colonists on his arrival
in North America in 1630 and was
elected governor 12 times during the
period from 1631 to 1648. Though
widely respected, he was criticized
for opposing the formation of a rep-
resentative assembly (1634), and the
colony’s
limitations on religious
freedom were decried by ROGER WIL-
LIAMS and ANNE HUTCHINSON. His son,
John Winthrop, detail of an oil paint-
ing, school of Sir Anthony Van Dyck, c.
1625–49; in the collection of the
American Antiquarian Society,
Worcester, Mass.
COURTESY OF THE AMERICAN ANTIQUARIAN SOCIETY,
WORCESTER, MASS.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
COURTESY OF THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, WASHINGTON,
THEODORE
Wister
ROOSEVELT.
wisteria or wistaria
in 1947 to live in seclusion in Ireland and then with various friends. Diag-
nosed with terminal cancer in 1949, he continued working intensively
until two days before his death. See also ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY.
Wolff
speaker and lobbyist who also led the World’s Woman’s Christian Tem-
perance Union from its founding in 1883. The WCTU was instrumental
in promoting nationwide temperance and in the eventual adoption of PRO-
HIBITION.
Wonder, Stevie orig. Steveland Judkins later Steveland
Wonders of the World, Seven See SEVEN WONDERS OF THE WORLD
Wonhy£ Daisa
wood alcohol See METHANOL
Wood Buffalo National Park Park, western Canada. Situated
between ATHABASCA and GREAT SLAVE lakes, it was established in 1922; it
occupies an area of 17,300 sq mi (44,807 sq km). The world’s largest
park, it is a vast region of forests and plains, crossed by the PEACE RIVER
and dotted with lakes. The habitat of the largest remaining herd of wood
buffalo (BISON) on the North American continent, as well as of bear, cari-
bou, moose, and beaver, it also provides nesting grounds for the endan-
gered WHOOPING CRANE.
Drake wood duck (Aix sponsa)
GRANT HEILMAN
1846. See also STAFFORDSHIRE FIGURE.
wood louse See PILL BUG, SOW BUG
wood mouse See FIELD MOUSE
wood rat or pack rat Any of 22 species (genus Neotoma, family
Cricetidae) of RODENTS that are nocturnal vegetarians of North and Cen-
tral American deserts, forests, and mountains. Wood rats are buff, gray,
or reddish brown, usually with white undersides and feet. They have large
ears and are 9–19 in. (23–47 cm) long, including the 3–9-in. (8–24-cm)
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Wood (cid:2) Woodhull
POLL WARBLER; CHAT; REDSTART.
Woodhull, Victoria orig. Victoria Claflin (b. Sept. 23, 1838,
FLUTE, piccolo, CLARINET, OBOE, ENGLISH HORN, and BASSOON. Other woodwinds
include the SAXOPHONE, RECORDER, PANPIPE, SHAKUHACHI, and SHAWM.
Woolf
Woodland culture Any of the prehistoric cultures of eastern North
America dating from the 1st millennium BC. The category includes cul-
tures such as the ADENA and HOPEWELL. Woodland cultures were character-
ized by the raising of corn, beans, and squash, the fashioning of distinctive
pottery, the use of the bow and arrow, and the building of burial mounds.
Most of these cultures were replaced by the MISSISSIPPIAN CULTURE in the 1st
millennium AD.
woodpecker Any of about 180 species (family Picidae) of mostly
nonmigratory, solitary birds found nearly worldwide. Woodpeckers spi-
ral up tree trunks, probing for insects, and chisel nest holes in dead wood
by means of rapidly repeating blows of the beak. Though they spend their
entire life in trees, only the few ground-feeding species can perch. Some
species eat fruits and berries or tree sap. Woodpeckers are usually silent,
except in spring, when males call loudly and drum on hollow wood. Spe-
cies range from 6 to 18 in. (15 to 46 cm) long. All have a straight, chisel-
like bill, and most are patterned in black, white, or yellow and bright
colours. See also FLICKER; IVOR Y-BILLED WOODPECKER; SAPSUCKER.
Woodstock in full Woodstock Music and Art Fair ROCK MUSIC
outlets. Its stores continued to proliferate in the U.S. and Britain, and it
acquired other chains dealing in sportswear, shoes, and children’s wear.
From 1992 it began closing hundreds of stores and selling off subsidiar-
ies; in 1998 it changed its name to Venator Group, Inc., and announced
its intention to focus on sporting goods. In 2001 the company name was
changed to Foot Locker, Inc.
wootz (steel)
2076 I working dog (cid:2) World Trade Center
over industry. It was formed in 1919 to resist the central party’s increas-
ing control over local party units and trade unions. In 1920 it objected to
LEON TROTSKY’s plan to transform trade unions into state organs. Led by
ALEKSANDRA KOLLONTAY and others, the group insisted that the unions, as
true representatives of
the proletariat, should control
the national
economy. At the 10th Party Congress (1921), its platform was rejected
and it was ordered to disperse.
working dog Any of various breeds of dog bred as guard, herding,
draft, or rescue animals. Breeds range from medium to large, but all are
sturdy and muscular, intelligent and loyal. Guard breeds include the AKITA,
BOXER, bullmastiff, DOBERMAN PINSCHER, giant and standard SCHNAUZERS, GREAT
DANE, MASTIFF, and ROTTWEILER. Livestock guard breeds include the Great
Pyrenees, komondor (Hungary), kuvasz (Tibet), and Pyrenean mountain
dogs (Britain). Herding dogs include the GERMAN SHEPHERD, SHETLAND SHEEP-
DOG, and WELSH CORGI. Breeds developed for hauling and rescue work
include the BERNESE MOUNTAIN DOG, Portuguese water dog, NEWFOUNDLAND,
ST. BERNARD, and SLED DOG.
Works Progress Administration See WPA
the INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT (IBRD; its main
component), the International Development Association (IDA), the Inter-
national Finance Corporation (IFC), the Multilateral Investment Guaran-
tee Agency (MIGA), and the International Center for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ICSID). The IDA (founded 1960) makes interest-
free loans to the bank’s poorest member countries. The IFC (founded
1956) lends to private businesses in developing countries. The MIGA
(founded 1985) supports national and private agencies that encourage for-
eign direct investment by offering insurance against noncommercial risks.
The ICSID (founded 1966) was developed to relieve the IBRD of the bur-
den of settling investment disputes. See also INTERNATIONAL MONETAR Y FUND.
World Council of Churches (WCC) Christian ecumenical organi-
World Court See INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
World Cup Major international FOOTBALL (soccer) competition. The tour-
nament brings together 32 qualifying national teams from around the
world, culminating in a match between the two top teams. It has been
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
World Health Organization (WHO) Public-health agency of the
Selected UNESCO World Heritage sites
site*
country
notes
site*
country
notes
Africa
Abu Ruwaysh
Aksum
Carthage
Dahshur
Gorée Island
Great Zimbabwe
Hadar
Karnak
Kilimanjaro
Kings, Valley of the
Lalibela
Leptis Magna
Luxor
Marrakech
Memphis
Mount Kenya
Ngorongoro
Olduvai Gorge
Philae
Saqqarah
Serengeti
Thebes
Timbuktu
Victoria Falls
Virunga
Ajanta Caves
Angkor
Ayutthaya
Baikal, Lake
Borobudur
Chogha Zanbil
Damascus
Delhi
Elephanta Island
Ellora Caves
Everest, Mount
Forbidden City
Great Wall of China
Ha Long Bay
Hatra
Hiroshima
Horyu Temple
Jerusalem
Kandy
Khiva
Kyoto
Lahore
Palmyra
Petra
Potala Palace
Qin tomb
San‘a’
Sundarbans
Taj Mahal
Ujong-Kulon
Zhoukoudian
Egypt
Ethiopia
Tunisia
Egypt
Egypt
Senegal
Zimbabwe
Ethiopia
Egypt
Tanzania
Egypt
Ethiopia
Libya
Egypt
Morocco
Egypt
Kenya
Tanzania
Tanzania
Egypt
Egypt
Tanzania
Egypt
Zambia
and Zimbabwe
Congo (Kinshasa)
archaeological remains
historic monuments
remains of ancient city
pyramids and funerary complex
pyramids and funerary complex
slave-trading depot
ruins of Shona capital
early hominid remains
Theban temple ruins
montane national park and reserve
Theban necropolis
rock-hewn medieval churches
remains of Roman architecture
Theban ruins
historic medina
remains of ancient city
national park and forest reserve
wildlife conservation area
early hominid remains
Nubian monuments
step pyramid and funerary complex
national park, wildlife refuge
ruins of ancient Egyptian capital
medieval center of Islamic culture
national parks, cataracts, Zambezi River,
rainforest, and wildlife
national park, diversity of habitats
India
Cambodia
Thailand
Russia
Indonesia
Syria
India
India
India
Nepal
China
China
Vietnam
Japan
Japan
Vietnam
Israel
Sri Lanka
Uzbekistan
Japan
Pakistan
Syria
Jordan
China
China
Yemen
Bangladesh
and India
India
Lebanon
Indonesia
China
rock-cut Buddhist monasteries
archaeological remains
ruins of capital complex
unique freshwater environment
Buddhist temple compound
ruins of Elamite city
historic city center
historic monuments and tomb
Hindu cave temple
Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina cave temples
montane national park
imperial palace in Beijing
extensive fortification
picturesque island group
ruins of Parthian city
peace memorial
Buddhist monuments
imperial citadel
Jewish, Islamic, Christian holy city
sacred Buddhist city
Islamic architecture
historic imperial capital
Mughal fortress, palace, gardens
ruins of ancient city
remains of ancient city
former residence of the Dalai Lama, in
Lhasa, Tibet
archaeological site, terra-cotta army
historic architecture
national park (India), sanctuary,
mangrove forest and wetlands
monumental funerary complex
ruins of three millennia of habitation
national park and reserve on Java
early hominid habitation
Australia and Oceania
Great Barrier Reef
Australia
Lord Howe Island
Australia
Rennell Island
Solomon Islands
Shark Bay
Australia
Uluru (Ayers Rock)
Australia
marine national park
diversity of habitats
unique island ecosystem
rare marine and terrestrial life-forms
national park, sandstone monolith
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Europe
Acropolis of Athens
Alhambra
Altamira
Amiens Cathedral
Arles
Auschwitz
Avebury
Bergen
Canterbury
Chartres Cathedral
Delphi
Ferrara
Florence
Fontainebleau
Giant’s Causeway
Granada
Hadrian’s Wall
Herculaneum
Istanbul
Kraków (Cracow)
Lascaux Grotto
Lübeck
Luxembourg city
Metéora
Mont-Saint-Michel
Moscow
Naples
Olympia
Palatine Chapel
(Aachen Cathedral)
Paris
Pompeii
Porto (Oporto)
Prague
Reims Cathedral
Rhodes
Rila Monastery
Saint Petersburg
Salzburg
Samos
Santiago
Segovia
Split
Stonehenge
Tallinn
Toledo
Transylvania
Vatican City
Venice
Versailles
Visby
North America
Banff
Chaco Canyon
Chichén Itzá
Cocos Island
Copán
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Havana
Hawaii Volcanoes
Jasper
Kluane
Kootenay
L’Anse aux
Meadows
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mexico City
Palenque
Greece
Spain
Spain
France
France
Poland
England
Norway
Switzerland
England
France
Greece
Italy
Italy
France
Northern Ireland
Spain
England
Italy
Turkey
Poland
France
Germany
Luxembourg
Greece
France
Russia
Italy
Greece
Germany
France
Italy
Portugal
Czech Republic
France
Greece
Bulgaria
Russia
Austria
Greece
Spain
Spain
Croatia
England
Estonia
Spain
Romania
Vatican City
Italy
France
Sweden
Canada
United States
Mexico
Costa Rica
Honduras
United States
United States
United States
Canada
Canada
Canada
Canada
United States
United States
Mexico
Mexico
complex of monuments
Moorish palace and fortress
prehistoric cave paintings
Romanesque and Gothic styles
Roman, Romanesque monuments
Nazi concentration camp
prehistoric megalith group
Hanseatic wharf
medieval city center
cathedral and abbey
Gothic architecture
remains of sanctuary complex
Renaissance architecture
historic city center
royal château and gardens
coastal rock formations
Moorish, Andalusian structures
Roman fortification
ruins of Vesuvius-destroyed town
numerous historic sites
medieval city center
prehistoric cave paintings
Hanseatic architecture
fortifications and old city
Orthodox Christian monasteries
medieval village and abbey
Kremlin and Red Square
historic city center
ruins of ancient sacred city
imperial chapel of Charlemagne,
Carolingian and Gothic styles
banks of Seine River
ruins of Vesuvius-destroyed town
historic city center
historic city center
High Gothic architecture
medieval city center
cradle of Bulgarian “National Revival”
historic city center and monuments
historic city center
ancient port and temple remains
old city and pilgrimage route
old town and Roman aqueduct
Roman palace, other monuments
prehistoric megalith group
historic city center
historic structures
Saxon fortified churches, villages
seat of Roman Catholic church
island city and surrounding lagoon
royal palace and park
historic Hanseatic town
national park, Rocky Mountains
historical park, Pueblo ruins
Mayan-Toltec architecture
national park, forest and marine life
remains of major Mayan city
subarctic national park, preserve
national park
colonial city center
national park
national park, Rocky Mountains
subarctic national park
national park, Rocky Mountains
remains of medieval Norse settlement in
Newfoundland
cave system and national park
prehistoric cliff dwellings
historic city center
national park, Mayan city
2078 I World Trade Organization (cid:2) World War II
Selected UNESCO World Heritage sites (continued)
site*
country
notes
site*
country
notes
North America (continued)
Santo Domingo
Dominican Rep.
Statue of Liberty
United States
Teotihuacán
Mexico
Tikal
Guatemala
Uxmal
Mexico
Wrangell-St. Elias
United States
Xochimilco
Mexico
Yellowstone
United States
Canada
South America
Arequipa
Brasília
Cartagena
Chan Chan
Colonia del
Sacramento
Brazil
Colombia
Uruguay
colonial city
national monument
extensive pre-Hispanic ruins
national park, Mayan ruins
Mayan city and ceremonial center
subarctic national park, preserve
Aztec canals and floating gardens
national park, geothermal formations
national park, Rocky Mountains
colonial architecture
urban planning and architecture
colonial port, fortresses, monuments
ruins of pre-Inca Chimú capital
Portuguese, Spanish colonial
architecture
South America (continued)
Córdoba
Argentina
Venezuela
Cuzco
Easter Island
Chile
Galapagos Islands
Ecuador
Huascarán, Mount
Iguaçu (Iguazú)
Brazil and
Argentina
Colombia
and Panama
Brazil
Bolivia
Ecuador
Argentina
Los Kaitos
and Darién
Machu Picchu
Nazca Lines
Pantanal
Potosí
Quito
Valdés Peninsula
Jesuit institutions and estates
Spanish, Dutch, local architecture
Inca and colonial architecture
monumental sculptures
national park, unique ecosystem
montane national park
national parks, waterfalls, subtropical
rainforests
national parks on the frontier, rainforest,
wetlands
Inca ruins
extensive geoglyphs
freshwater wetland ecosystem
colonial industrial city
colonial city center
seals, whales
*The spelling or styling of place-names in this table may differ from those given on the World Heritage List; in addition, some place-names represent one or more 
constituent parts of larger World Heritage sites.
towers, as well as adjacent buildings, collapsed into enormous piles of
debris. The attacks claimed the lives of some 2,750 people. Thousands
more were injured. See SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACKS.
World Trade Organization (WTO) INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION
LUSITANIA; PARIS PEACE CONFERENCE; Treaties of BREST-LITOVSK, NEUILLY, SAINT-
GERMAIN, SÈVRES, TRIANON, and VERSAILLES; EDMUND H.H. ALLENBY, FERDINAND
FOCH, JOHN FRENCH, DOUGLAS HAIG, PAUL VON HINDENBURG, JOSEPH-JACQUES-
CÉSAIRE JOFFRE, ERICH LUDENDORFF, JOHN PERSHING.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
worm Any of thousands of species of unrelated INVERTEBRATE animals that
typically have a soft, slender, elongated body with no appendages. The
major phyla are Platyhelminthes (FLATWORMS), Annelida (ANNELIDS, or seg-
mented worms), Nemertea (ribbon worms), Acanthocephala (spiny-
headed worms), and Aschelminthes (NEMATODES and others). There are
several minor phyla. Length ranges from microscopic (e.g., some aschel-
minths) to more than 100 ft (30 m) (some ribbon worms). Worms are
found worldwide on land and in water. They may be parasitic or free-
living and are important as soil conditioners, parasites, and a link in the
food chain in all ecosystems. See also FLUKE, PINWORM, POLYCHAETE, ROTIFER,
TAPEWORM, TUBE WORM.
Worms
IPPINE SEA; CASABLANCA, POTSDAM, TEHRAN, and YALTA conferences; DUNKIRK
EVACUATION; LEND-LEASE; MUNICH AGREEMENT; NÜRNBERG TRIALS; Siege of LENIN-
GRAD; SINO-JAPANESE WARS; OMAR BRADLEY, WINSTON CHURCHILL, DWIGHT D.
EISENHOWER, DOUGLAS MACARTHUR, BERNARD LAW MONTGOMER Y, BENITO MUS-
SOLINI, GEORGE PATTON, ERWIN ROMMEL, FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT, JOSEPH STALIN,
YAMAMOTO ISOROKU, GEORGY K. ZHUKOV.
World Wildlife Fund or World Wide Fund for Nature Larg-
Wotan See ODIN
he was engaged to design the Shel-
donian Theatre at Oxford. Though
Classical in form, the theatre was
roofed with novel wood trusses that
were the product of Wren’s scholarly
and empirical approach. As King’s
Surveyor of Works (1669–1718), he
had a hand in the rebuilding of more
than 50 churches destroyed in the
GREAT FIRE OF LONDON. Meanwhile, he
was evolving designs for SAINT PAUL’S
CATHEDRAL, a work that occupied him
until its completion in 1710. Other
works, generally in the English
Baroque style, include the classical
Trinity College library, Cambridge
(1676–84), additions to Hampton
Court (begun 1689), and Greenwich
Hospital (begun 1696). Wren was
buried in Saint Paul’s; nearby is the
famous inscription: “Reader, if you
seek a monument, look around.”
wrench or spanner Tool, usu-
Sir Christopher Wren, detail of an oil
painting by Sir Godfrey Kneller, 1711;
in the National Portrait Gallery, Lon-
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY,
LONDON
Wright, Frances known as Fanny Wright (b. Sept. 6, 1795,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
wrench (cid:2) writ
Wright, Mickey orig. Mary Kathryn Wright (b. Feb. 14, 1935,
Wright, Wilbur; and Wright, Orville (respectively b. April 16,
GLENN H. CURTISS.
monument was established in 1924 and comprises more than 800 red
sandstone pueblos built during the 11th–13th centuries. It has an area of
55 sq mi (142 sq km).
Wuppertal
Wynette
X-ray ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION of extremely short WAVELENGTH (100
nanometres to 0.001 nanometre) produced by the deceleration of charged
particles or the transitions of ELECTRONs in atoms. X-rays travel at the speed
of light and exhibit phenomena associated with WAVEs, but experiments
indicate that they can also behave like particles (see WAVE-PARTICLE DUALITY).
On the ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM, they lie between GAMMA RAYs and ULTRA-
Xanthus
xerography
Xi’an
XML in full Extensible Markup Language. MARKUP LANGUAGE
Xochicalco
Y2K bug or Year 2000 bug or millennium bug Potential prob-
Ya-lung River See YALONG RIVER
yacht
yam Any of several plant species of the genus Dioscorea (family
Dioscoreaceae, or yam family), native to warmer regions of both hemi-
spheres. A number of species are cultivated for food in the tropics; in cer-
tain tropical cultures, notably of West Africa and New Guinea, the yam
is the primary agricultural commodity and the focal point of elaborate
ritual. The edible tuberous roots, which vary in taste from sweet to bitter
to tasteless, are eaten as cooked starchy vegetables. Often boiled and then
mashed, they may also be fried, roasted, or baked. True yams are botani-
cally distinct from the SWEET POTATO, though in the U.S. the names are
commonly interchanged. Dioscorea mexicana contains a chemical that
can suppress ovulation in humans and is used as the basis for birth-control
pills. The so-called yam bean is the legume JICAMA.
was to become the GRAND CANAL network. He embarked on military cam-
paigns in Vietnam and Inner Asia. Three expeditions to Korea were so
disastrous that the Chinese people turned against him; he was assassinated
in southern China. One of his former officials reunited the empire and
established the TANG DYNASTY. See also WENDI.
Yangôn
lowlands. Since the construction and expansion of the Yarqon-Negev
Project in the 1950s (see NEGEV), the water level has gone down, and pol-
lution has increased. During World War I (1914–18), it was the site of
several important British victories over the Ottoman Empire in the Allied
Powers’ conquest of Palestine.
yarrow
sia. An ironworks was established in 1721, and a fortress, named after
Empress CATHERINE I, was founded there in 1722. It grew as the centre for
all the ironworks of the URAL MOUNTAINS region, and its importance
increased with the building of a highway (1783) and the TRANS-SIBERIAN
RAILROAD. It achieved notoriety as the place where Tsar NICHOLAS II and his
family were held prisoner and executed by the BOLSHEVIKs in 1918. In 1924
it was renamed Sverdlovsk in honour of YAKOV SVERDLOV. The city reverted
to its original name after the breakup of the U.S.S.R. in 1991. It is a major
industrial centre, especially for heavy machinery.
Yelizavetpol See GÄNCÄ
yellow bunting See YELLOWHAMMER
Yellow Emperor See HUANGDI
yellow fever Acute infectious tropical disease, sometimes occurring in
temperate zones. Abrupt onset of headache, backache, fever, nausea, and
vomiting is followed by either recovery with immunity or by higher fever,
slow pulse, and vomiting of blood. Patients may die in a week. JAUNDICE is
common (hence the name). One of the world’s great plagues for 300 years,
it is caused by a virus transmitted by several species of mosquitoes. CARLOS
FINLAY suggested and WALTER REED proved this means of spread, leading to
near elimination of the disease through mosquito control (see WILLIAM GOR-
GAS). Treatment consists of supportive care, particularly fever reduction.
Control of mosquitoes near cities and live-virus vaccines—developed by
Max Theiler (1899–1972), who won a 1951 Nobel Prize for his work—
have made yellow fever completely preventable.
yellow jacket Any of 35–40 species (genus Dolichovespula or Vesp-
ula) of social WASPS, principally of the Northern Hemisphere, named for
the black bands on its yellow abdomen. They differ from other wasps in
having their wings folded longitudinally when at rest. Dolichovespula
species typically build exposed nests. Vespula species build concealed
nests underground or in protected cavities; when a nest is stepped on, the
colony may erupt in an angry, stinging swarm. Nest size varies widely;
some nests can be held in one hand, whereas nests in warmer climates
may weigh half a ton.
yellow journalism In newspaper publishing, the use of lurid features
and sensationalized news in newspaper publishing to attract readers and
increase circulation. The phrase was coined in the 1890s to describe tac-
tics employed in the furious competition between two New York papers,
JOSEPH PULITZER’s World and WILLIAM RANDOLPH HEARST’s Journal. When
Hearst hired away from Pulitzer a cartoonist who had drawn the
immensely popular comic strip “The Yellow Kid,” another cartoonist was
hired to draw the comic for the World; the rivalry excited so much atten-
tion that the competition was dubbed yellow journalism. Techniques of
the period that became permanent features of U.S. journalism include
banner headlines, coloured comics, and copious illustrations.
yellow poplar See TULIP TREE
Yellow River See HUANG HE
Yellow Sea Chinese Huang Hai
COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES
Yelü Chucai or Yeh-lü Ch’u-
ts’ai
theological seminary. Today the university is independent, although its
curriculum emphasizes Jewish culture and history. Yeshiva consists of a
liberal arts college, a college for women, a college of Hebraic studies, and
the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, as well as schools of Judaic
studies, Talmudic studies, business, law (the Cardozo School), social
work, education, and graduate studies, among others.
Yeti See ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN
Yevtushenko
Yijing or I Ching
Yongle emperor or Yung-lo emperor
Yoruba
(1874–1962) in Paris. The Young Plan, a revision of the DAWES PLAN,
reduced the amount due from Germany to $26.3 billion, to be paid over
59 years, and ended foreign controls on German economic life. It went
into effect in 1930, but the world depression affected Germany’s ability
to pay. When ADOLF HITLER came to power in 1933, he repudiated the obli-
gations of the Treaty of VERSAILLES, including reparations.
Young Tunisians Political party formed in 1907 by French-educated
Tunisian intellectuals to oppose French rule. They demanded complete
control of the country’s government and administration and full citizen-
ship rights for both Tunisians and Frenchmen. They protested the Italian
invasion of Libya (1911) and rioted against French actions at home. The
French exiled its leaders, driving the party underground until 1920, when
it reemerged and reorganized itself as the Destour Party, which remained
active until 1957. See also HABIB BOURGUIBA.
Young Turks Turkish Jöntürkler Coalition of young dissidents who
ended the sultanate of the OTTOMAN EMPIRE. Consisting of college students
and dissident soldiers, the group succeeded in 1908 in forcing ABDÜLHA-
MID II to reinstitute the 1876 constitution and recall the legislature. They
deposed him the following year, reorganized the government, and began
modernizing and industrializing Turkish society. They joined the CENTRAL
POWERS during World War I (1914–18). Facing defeat, they resigned a
month before the war ended. See also MUSTAFA KEMAL ATATÜRK; ENVER PASHA;
MIDHAT PASHA.
Younghusband, Sir Francis Edward (b. May 31, 1863, Murree,
Yourcenar
NATIONAL LIBERATION FRONT.
Young Men’s Christian Association See YMCA
Young Plan (1929) Renegotiation of Germany’s World War I REPARA-
TIONS payments by a committee chaired by the U.S. lawyer Owen D. Young
cerned about the health of young people breathing polluted air in industrial
cities. Common in Germany in the early 1900s, youth hostels spread
through Europe and other parts of the world after World War I, and an
international organization was formed in 1932; currently known as Hos-
telling International and based in London,
its membership includes
national federations in more than 60 countries, comprising some 4,000
hostels. Some hostels still impose age limits.
Ypres
Yue Fei or Yüeh Fei
QUARKs.
Zambia’s northern boundaries, and Lake
Bangweulu and the Bangweulu Swamps
form extensive wetlands farther
to the
south. The Muchinga Mountains in the east
and the ranges along the eastern border
have the highest elevations in the country. There are forests of Zambezi
teak in the southwest. Zambia’s economy depends heavily on the pro-
duction and export of copper. Other important mineral resources include
lead, zinc, cobalt, coal, and gold. Agriculture also is important. There is
some manufacturing. Zambia is a republic with one legislative house; its
head of state and government is the president. Ancestors of the Tonga
reached the region early in the 2nd millennium AD, but other peoples from
Congo (Kinshasa) and Angola reached the country only in the 17th–18th
century. Portuguese trading missions were established early in the 18th
century. Emissaries of CECIL RHODES and the British South Africa Company
concluded treaties with most of the Zambian chiefs during the 1890s. The
company administered the region known as Northern Rhodesia until 1924,
when it became a British protectorate. It was part of the Central African
Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland in 1953–63. In 1964 Northern
Rhodesia became independent as the Republic of Zambia. A constitutional
amendment enacted in 1991 allowed opposition parties. However, the
country continued to experience political tension and government corrup-
tion.
Zamboanga
a commercial and manufacturing centre for an agricultural area that pro-
duces corn, sugarcane, cotton, fruits and vegetables, and livestock. Bee-
keeping and tourism also contribute to the economy. The 17th-century
Basilica of Zapopan is the site of annual pilgrimages.
Zaporizhzhya
Zechariah
Zeno of Elea
Zhang Daoling or Chang Tao-ling
wake of these missions, resulting in Chinese colonization of Southeast
Asia and consequent tributary trade that lasted into the 19th century.
Zhengzhou
Zhu Yuanzhang See HONGWU EMPEROR
Zhuangzi or Chuang-tzu
Zimmermann
autoharp, cimbalom, DULCIMER, KOTO, and even the CLAVICHORD, HARPSICHORD,
and PIANO.
Zoan See TANIS
zodiac
DAVID BEN-GURION, HAGANA, VLADIMIR JABOTINSKY, IRGUN ZVAI LEUMI.
MENT, one of the TRANSITION ELEMENTs,
scripture. Zoroastrianism enjoyed status as an official religion at various
times before the advent of ISLAM, but Zoroastrians were persecuted in the
8th–10th centuries, and some left Iran to settle in India. By the 19th cen-
tury these Indian Zoroastrians, or PARSIs, were noted for their wealth and
education. The small group of Zoroastrians remaining in Iran are known
as the GABARs.
Zorrilla
Zürich
Encyclopædia Britannica
Jacob E. Safra, Chairman of the Board
Jorge Aguilar-Cauz, President
EDITORIAL
Dale H. Hoiberg, Senior Vice President 
and Editor
Anita Wolff, Deputy Editor
Marsha Mackenzie, Managing
Editor and Director of Production
Michael Levy, Senior Manager, 
Editorial Projects
Robert Curley, Senior Editor
Brian Duignan, Senior Editor
Kathleen Kuiper, Senior Editor
Kenneth Pletcher, Senior Editor
Jeffrey Wallenfeldt, Senior Editor
Charles Cegielski, Associate Editor
Michael Frassetto, Associate Editor
James Hennelly, Associate Editor
William L. Hosch, Associate Editor
Michael R. Hynes, Associate Editor
Amy McKenna, Associate Editor
Tom Michael, Associate Editor
Sarah Forbes Orwig, Associate Editor
Amy Tikkanen, Associate Editor
Kathleen B. Sheetz, Executive Assistant
ART DEPARTMENT
Kathy Nakamura, Senior Media Editor
David Alexovich, Manager, 
Illustration
Thomas J. Spanos, Lead Electronic 
Illustrator
Christine McCabe, Illustrator
Jerry Kraus, Illustrator
Katherine D. Burgess, Assistant Illustrator
Claudiu Varan, Assistant Illustrator
CARTOGRAPHY
Michael Nutter, Map Editor
COMPOSITION TECHNOLOGY
AND DESIGN
Steven N. Kapusta, Director
Cate Nichols, Compositor
Lara C. Mondae, Designer
COPY DEPARTMENT
Sylvia Wallace, Director
Julian Ronning, Supervisor
Joan Lackowski, Special Projects Supervisor
J.E. Luebering, Senior Copy Editor
Jennifer Mack, Senior Copy Editor
René Ostberg, Copy Editor
Marya Park, Copy Editor
Michael Ray, Copy Editor
EDITORIAL TECHNOLOGIES
Steven Bosco, Director
Gavin Chiu, Principal Engineer
Bruce Walters, Systems Coordinator
Mark Wiechec, Principal Engineer
PUBLISHING TECHNOLOGIES
Lisa Braucher, Data Editor
MEDIA ASSET MANAGEMENT
Jeannine Deubel, Manager
Kimberly L. Cleary, Supervisor, 
Illustration Control
Kurt Heintz, Media Production Technician
PRODUCTION CONTROL
Marilyn Barton, Senior Coordinator
REFERENCE LIBRARY
Henry Bolzon, Head Librarian
Lars Mahinske, Geography Curator
Sandra Jo Freeman, Library Assistant
MANUFACTURING
Kim Gerber, Director
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Merriam-Webster
The following is the editorial staff of Merriam-Webster that contributed to
Merriam-Webster ’s Collegiate Encyclopedia:
Editor: Mark A. Stevens; Associate Editors: Jocelyn White Franklin, Francesca M. Forrest, Kathleen M. Doherty; 
Art Coordinator: Lynn Stowe Tomb; Pronunciation Editor: David B. Justice
MERRIAM-WEBSTER CONSULTANTS: Anne Agur (University of Toronto), Robert Audi (University of Nebraska), Carol Berkin
(Baruch College, City University of New York), Paul Bottino (University of Maryland), Brian Burrell (University of
Massachusetts), Louis P. Cain (Loyola University Chicago, Northwestern University), Francis D. K. Ching (University of
Washington), Dale F. Eickelman (Dartmouth College), John A. Garraty (Columbia University [emeritus]), Robert B.
Gordon (Yale University), James J. Jenkins (University of South Florida), John W. Johnson (University of Northern Iowa),
Daniel Kaiser (Sarah Lawrence College), Cornelis Klein (University of New Mexico), Joel Krieger (Wellesley College),
James M. Powell (Syracuse University [emeritus]), Edwin D. Reilly, Jr. (SUNY-Albany [emeritus]), Conrad Schirokauer
(Columbia University), Stephen L. Schneider (University of Massachusetts), Thomas E. Skidmore (Brown University),
Fredric P. Smoler (Sarah Lawrence College), Graham Speake (Oxford University), William C. Summers (Yale University),
Christine Sutton (Oxford University), Birdsall S. Viault (Winthrop University [emeritus]), David K. Wyatt (Cornell
University), Mark J. Zucker (Louisiana State University)
MERRIAM-WEBSTER EDITORIAL STAFF: Michael G. Belanger, Susan L. Brady, Deanna Chiasson, Jennifer N. Cislo, Robert D.
Copeland, Joanne M. Despres, Florence A. Fowler, Daniel J. Hopkins, Joan I. Narmontas, Kara L. Noble, Madeline L.
Novak, Seán O’Mannion-Espejo, Roger J. Pease, Stephen J. Perrault, Thomas F. Pitoniak, James L. Rader, Donna L.
Rickerby, Michael D. Roundy, Maria A. Sansalone, Adrienne M. Scholz, Michael Shally-Jensen, Peter A. Sokolowski,
Karen L. Wilkinson
Particular acknowledgment is due to Jennifer Cislo, who fact-checked the great majority of the encyclopedia’s entries;
Mike Roundy, who advised on a range of scientific and technical subject areas; Deanna Chiasson, who coordinated the
provision of pronunciations; Jim Rader, who served as language consultant; Steve Perrault, who served as sports consult-
ant; Dan Hopkins, who acted as in-house cartography coordinator; Roger Pease, who drew up the botany and zoology
entry lists; Joan Narmontas, who oversaw creation of the biological diagrams; Seán O’Mannion-Espejo and Peter
Sokolowski, who wrote many of the music articles; Karen Wilkinson, who prepared many of the tables; Robert Copeland,
who handled the file conversions; and Adrienne Scholz, who proofread virtually the entire volume. Mike Shally-Jensen
contributed valuable analyses and many hundreds of articles in the project’s early stages.
MERRIAM-WEBSTER FREELANCE STAFF: Michael J. Anderson, Cynthia Susan Ashby, Arlene Bensam, Frank Calvillo, May K.
Chapman, Mary Wood Cornog, Lori Dirks, Jennifer Goss Duby, Elizabeth Morris Ewell, Amy Fass, Sharon Goldstein,
Mary Catherine Hager, Helen Downs Haller, Orin K. Hargraves, Stephanie Hiebert, Betty B. Hoskins, Patricia Hurley
Jarden, Anthony P. Johnson, Frances Kianka, Mark L. Koontz, Polly Kummel, Lynne Lackenbach, Ellen S. Leach, Arthur
Maisel, Danny Marcus, Marvin Martin, Doris Maxfield, Wayne F. Moquin, Caroline Power, Margo Quinto, Mary H.
Russell, Barbara H. Salazar, Fran Shonfeld Sherman, Elizabeth Stevens, Jeri Stolk, Barbara R. Tepperman, Deborah J.
Untener, Helen M. Webber, Holly Isabella Webber
The project owes special thanks to Mike Anderson, Susan Ashby, Amy Fass, Mary Catherine Hager, Helen Haller,
Stephanie Hiebert, Polly Kummel, Lynne Lackenbach, Barbara Salazar, and Holly Webber for their unusually 
extensive work.
OTHER CONTRIBUTORS: Tech-Graphics Corporation of Atlantic Highlands, N.J., produced the encyclopedia’s diagrams. John
Nelson provided its maps. Susana Darwin and Amor Montes de Oca selected and prepared the photographs from the
Encyclopædia Britannica collection. Mark Diller drew up the religion entry list. Ellen Sullivan Farley and Loree Hany
assisted in technical preparation of the art. Dale Good served as consultant on project management. Ted Atanowski pro-
vided computer assistance. The text was typeset by the Clarinda Co. of Clarinda, Iowa, under the exemplary direction of
Dee Hughes. Finally, John M. Morse, publisher of Merriam-Webster, conceived the encyclopedia more than 20 years
before its publication and offered indispensable support and encouragement throughout its development.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Flags of the World l Plate 1
Flags of the World l Plate 1
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra*
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria*
Azerbaijan
The Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
MBRA . F
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia*
Plate 2 l
Flags of the World
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
O R D E M
P RO G
Brunei
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Costa Rica*
Coˆ te d’Ivoire
Croatia
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Flags of the World l Plate 3
Flags of the World l Plate 3
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic*
East Timor
Ecuador*
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Finland*
France
Gabon
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
The Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Plate 4 l
Flags of the World
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
L I B
L I B
T I E M B R E
T I E M B R E
D E 1 8 2 1
D E 1 8 2 1
Guatemala*
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti*
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Flags of the World l Plate 5
Flags of the World l Plate 5
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Madagascar
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
Malawˆ i
Malaysia
Maldives
Plate 6 l
Flags of the World
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia, Federated States of
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
The Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua*
Niger
Nigeria
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Flags of the World l Plate 7
Flags of the World l Plate 7
Norway
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru*
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Saint Kitts & Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint V incent & the Grenadines
Samoa
San Marino*
São Tomé and Príncipe
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
Plate 8 l
Flags of the World
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia and Montenegro
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
P L V S
V L TR
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Tanzania
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Flags of the World l Plate 9
Flags of the World l Plate 9
Thailand
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Vatican City
Venezuela*
V ietnam
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Plate 10 l World Political Map
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
World Political Map l Plate 11
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Plate 12lWorld Religions
World Population Density 
World Populations
l Plate 13
Indigenous Skin Color
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Plate 14 l World Heritage sites
On this plate and the
adjoining one is a
sampling of official
World Heritage sites,
as designated by the
United Nations
Educational, Scientific
and Cultural
Organization
(UNESCO).
This page (clockwise):
Rose window, Notre-Dame
de Paris, 13th century;
terra-cotta warriors from
the 3rd-century BC Qin
tomb of Emperor
Shihuangdi, near Xi'an,
China; elephants and
acacia trees on the plain
near Kilimanjaro, Tanzania;
abundant and colourful sea
life on the Great Barrier
Reef, off the northeast
coast of Australia;
cruciform Coptic church
carved from solid rock, c.
13th century, Lalibela,
Ethiopia.
Plate 14: Photographs (clockwise from top left) The Bridgeman Art Library/Getty Images; Keren Su—Taxi/Getty Images; Renee Lynn—Stone/Getty Images;
Jeff Hunter—The Image Bank/Getty Images; Upperhall Ltd./Robert Harding World Imagery/Getty Images.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
World Heritage sites
l Plate 15
This page (clockwise from top
left) the pyramid El Castillo in the
Mayan city of Chichén Itzá,
founded 6th century AD, Yucatán,
Mexico; Temple of the Golden
Pavilion, Ky§to, Japan, 14th
century (rebuilt, 1955); the Taj
Mahal, built mainly 1632–43 by
Shah Jahan as a mausoleum for
his wife Mumtaz Mahal, Agra,
India; giant tortoise on Isabela
Island, Galapagos Islands, off
the coast of Ecuador; Anasazi
cliff dwellings, c. 1200, Mesa
Verde National Park, Colorado;
detail of a painted ceiling in Rila
Monastery, southwestern
Bulgaria.
Plate 15: Photographs (clockwise from top left) © Corbis; Kaz Mori—The Image Bank/Getty Images; Gavin Hellier—Robert Harding World Imagery/Getty Images;
Craig Lovell/Corbis; Walter Rawlings—Robert Harding World Imagery/Getty Images; © Corbis.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
International Time Zones
Plate 16l
Britannica
CONCISE
ENCYCLOPEDIA
Front cover: (clockwise from top row, le f t ) Vincenzo
 Images;
 Ange rmaye r ;
Hans Hinz, Basel; Sean Ga l lup /Ge t ty Images;
courtesy of the
Germany, John F. Shrawder/Shostal. Back cover:
NA SA / J P L ;
 P ramod
Chandra; Anthony Mercieca from The National
Audubon Society Collection/Photo Researchers;
J.C. Allen and Son; Stephen
Researchers.
Britannica
CONCISE
ENCYCLOPEDIA
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Chicago • London • New Delhi • Paris • Seoul • Sydney • Taipei • Tokyo
Britannica
CONCISE
ENCYCLOPEDIA
Encyclopædia Britannica
First published in 1768, the Encyclopædia Britannica has long been the standard by which all
other reference works are judged.  It represents a tradition of excellence that was built, over 
the centuries, on meticulous scholarship and unmatched attention to detail.  Today,
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., produces a range of fine products for reference, education, and
learning in different media and in many different languages. Wherever you see the Britannica
name—in print, on the Internet, CD-ROM, or DVD—it is your guarantee of quality, accuracy,
and authority.
© 2006 BY ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
Copyright Under International Copyright Union
All Rights Reserved Under International and Universal Copyright Conventions
by Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2006921235
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-59339-492-9
The original edition of this book, created in conjunction with Merriam-Webster, Incorporated, was published
in 2000 as Merriam-Webster ’s Collegiate Encyclopedia. 
No part of this work may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publisher.
Encyclopædia Britannica and other fine products are available on the Internet at http://www.britannica.com.
(Trademark Reg. U.S. Pat. Off.) Printed in Peru.
Contents
Foreword
Explanatory Notes
Abbreviations
Pronunciation Symbols
Guide to Plates and Map Legend
Britannica Concise Encyclopedia
Encyclopædia Britannica Corporate Page
Merriam-Webster Editorial Staff
Foreword
T he need for information and the craving
for knowledge are timeless and univer-
sal. The Britannica Concise Encyclopedia
satisfies the essence of both these needs.
This volume represents the distillation of
essential information into a compact and eminently
useful single volume.
This latest version of Britannica Concise Encyclopedia
answers today’s need for a portable, convenient ref-
erence work covering history, geography, the sci-
ences, religion, sports, entertainment, technology,
and the arts. We hope it will become a favourite
source for helping students with their homework,
for background to news events, for writers and
crossword-puzzle enthusiasts, for solving disputes,
and for random browsing.
This printing of Britannica Concise Encyclopedia has
been broadly revised. Among the 2.8 million words
that make up the nearly 28,000 entries are many
new titles and many that have been updated. In the
16-page colour plates section, you will find the
newest versions of national flags as well as a
world map, maps of world religions and popula-
tion characteristics, a selection of World Heritage
sites, and a useful world map depicting interna-
tional time zones. More than 30 tables catalog
everything from Nobel Prize winners to chemical
elements to popes to the International System of
Units of measurement and their U.S. equivalents.
Many of the more than 190 maps have been
revised, and all of the more than 150 illustrations
have been redrawn. The more than 2,000 photo-
graphs enhance both the appearance and content
of Britannica Concise.
The editors of Encyclopædia Britannica are proud
to present the Britannica Concise Encyclopedia. We
hope that you will consult it often and that it will
both satisfy your immediate need for information
and lead you to the in-depth information of the 40
million words of the Encyclopædia Britannica.
Creating the highest level of reference works has
been our goal for 238 years, and we are pleased to
welcome you to the Britannica family.
Anita Wolff
Editor
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
older and generally discarded name for an entity,
usually a geographical locale. The label officially
indicates a formal or legal version of a name. The
label in full precedes a fully spelled-out version of a
name that is usually encountered in its shorter
form. A label consisting of a language name pre-
cedes a native version or spelling of a name or term.
Biographical entry headwords in particular may
employ parentheses in several ways. Parentheses
may enclose portions of a person’s name that are
rarely used, a person’s original given name or
names, a later addition such as a title, or transla-
tions of titles or epithets. 
drum or croaker
Odin or Wotan 
Bacall, Lauren orig. Betty Joan Perske 
O’Connell, Daniel known as the Liberator 
Iqaluit formerly Frobisher Bay
Latvia officially Republic of Latvia 
OCR in full optical character recognition
fax in full facsimile
Magellan, Strait of Spanish Estrecho de 
Magallanes
Odysseus Roman Ulysses
Connelly, Marc(us Cook)
Doctorow, E(dgar) L(aurence)
Hughes,  (James Mercer) Langston
Basil II known as Basil Bulgaroctonus (“Slayer of
the Bulgars”) 
Pronunciations. Entries for terms and names
whose pronunciation the encyclopedia’s likely
users might hesitate over are supplied with pro-
nunciations. Foreign names or terms that are pro-
nounced in a markedly different way by native
speakers and English-speakers are frequently pro-
vided with two pronunciations, one of them pre-
ceded by a language label (e.g., English, French,
Spanish). Thus, for Hassan II we provide the pro-
Alphabetization.
The articles are alphabetized
word by word, with further alphabetizing letter by
letter within a word.  A “word” is here defined as a
unit of one or more characters set off from other
words by spaces, dashes, hyphens, or other symbols.
Entry titles consisting of more than one word are
arranged in alphabetical order of the succeeding
words.  Titles with identical spellings are arranged in
the order (1) persons, (2) places, and (3) things. The
following list illustrates the word-by-word principle:
Horn, Cape
Horn of Africa 
hornbill
Horne, Lena
horned toad
Hornsby, Rogers
Further alphabetization rules include the follow-
ing: (1) Diacritics, apostrophes, dashes, periods,
and ampersands are ignored in alphabetization. (2)
Names of monarchs and popes that are identical
except for the Roman numeral following the name
are ordered numerically. (3) Names beginning with
Mac- and Mc- are ordered literally, all names begin-
ning with Mac- preceding (by a number of pages)
all names beginning with Mc-. (4) Entry headwords
beginning with numbers are alphabetized as if they
were spelled out.
Entry headword style. Variant spellings or ver-
sions of the encyclopedia’s entry headwords are
printed in boldface type when they are in common
use; more obscure variants are printed in ordinary
roman type. No effort has been made to be exhaus-
tive in listing variants.
Several italicized terms are used to discriminate
among the variants. The label or simply indicates a
common alternative name or spelling. The label
orig. precedes the birth name of a person who is
entered under a name that was adopted or acquired
subsequently. When a person’s original surname is
different from the name in the principal headword,
the entire birth name is given, not enclosed in
parentheses. The label known as precedes a common
way of referring to a person that may never have
had formal status. The label formerly indicates an
Chinese names are almost always transcribed
according to the Pinyin system. Where a Chinese
name or term appears as a headword, the older
Wade-Giles spelling is given as an or variant.  Place-
names and biographical names on Taiwan, howev-
er, are generally listed in their Wade-Giles spelling,
with the Pinyin spelling as a variant. A few Chinese
names widely used in English (e.g., Confucius)
retain their traditional English spelling.
Japanese names and terms are generally transcribed
according to the Hepburn system but without
macrons to indicate vowel length.
Russian names and terms generally observe tradi-
tional Western spellings and follow the diacritic-
free system employed by the U.S. Board on
Geographic Names. 
Arabic names and terms generally follow the best-
established Western usage. Except in a few well-
established Western transliterations, the l in the arti-
cle al- or el- (“the”) is not assimilated to a following
consonant (thus, we employ the spelling Harun al-
Rashid, not Harun ar-Rashid), even though such
assimilation reflects Arabic pronunciation and is
sometimes encountered in English sources.
Cross-references. Cross-references to other articles
are indicated by small capitals in sans-serif type for
the alphabetized element of the term or name. Thus,
“J. VON NEUMANN” sends the reader to the V’s, “J. W.
von GOETHE” to the G’s; “CAPE BRETON ISLAND” sends the
reader to the C’s, “Cape of GOOD HOPE” to the G’s;
and so on. In the case of personal names in which
there is no ambiguity as to alphabetical placement,
the entire name appears in small capitals.
A term is cross-referenced only when it is likely that
the reader of the article within which the cross-ref-
erence appears would want to be notified about the
additional article. Hence many terms for which
there are corresponding entries are not highlighted
as references. For instance, in the article on Tim
Berners-Lee, we have cross-referenced “World Wide
Web” (whose invention was his principal achieve-
ment) but not “Internet,” which is naturally cross-
referenced within the “World Wide Web” article.
Because cross-referencing of this kind is discre-
tionary, readers should not assume that a noun
lacks its own entry simply because it is not refer-
enced within the article being read.
For the sake of saving space, many people who
receive their own entries have their given names
abbreviated and their surnames in small capitals
when they are mentioned in an article, regardless of
how likely the reader of the article is to want to be
alerted to the biographical entry. The names of
countries, U.S. states, and Canadian provinces, by
contrast, are virtually never referenced, regardless
of their centrality to a given article, on the pre-
sumption that readers will correctly assume that the
encyclopedia contains articles on all such entities.
Some 3,000 cross-references are provided at their
own alphabetical place, to direct the reader who has
looked up a variant version of the name or has
expected an entry to be alphabetized according to
an element other than the one actually used.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Abbreviations
anno Domini
Admiral
Alabama
Amer. American
Ariz.
Arizona
Arkansas
before Christ
Celsius
circa
California
Capt.
captain
cubic centimetre(s)
century, centuries
cent.
centimetre(s)
Company, County
Colorado, Colonel
Conn. Connecticut
Corp.
Corporation
cubic
District of Columbia
Delaware
Doctor
exempli gratia (for example)
estimate, estimated
Ethiopia
Fahrenheit
flourished
Florida
foot, feet
gram(s)
Georgia
General
Governor
id est (that is)
Illinois
inch(es)
Indiana
Junior
Kelvin
Kansas
kilogram(s)
kilometre(s)
kilometres per hour
Kentucky
Louisiana
lb, lbs
pound, pounds
metre(s)
M.A. Master of Arts
Major
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Mass. Massachusetts
Maryland
Maine
mile(s)
Mich. Michigan
Minn. Minnesota
Miss. Mississippi
millilitre(s)
millimetre(s)
Missouri
Mont. Montana
miles per hour
North
North Carolina
North Dakota
northeastern
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
northwestern
New York
Okla.
Oklahoma
Oregon
ounce(s)
Pennsylvania
Ph.D.
Doctor of Philosophy
Pres.
President
Queen. Queensland
reigned, ruled
Reverend
Rhode Island
South
South Carolina
South Dakota
southeastern
Senator
square
Saint
southwestern
Tenn.
Tennessee
United Nations
United States
Virginia
versus
Vermont
West Virginia
Wash. Washington
Wisc. Wisconsin
Wyoming
banana, collide, abut, humdrum
Guide to Plates
Flags of the World
World Political Map
World Religions Map
World Population Density Map
World Indigenous Skin Color Map
World Heritage sites
International Time Zones
Plates
1 – 9
Plates
10 – 11
Plate
Plate
Plate
Plates
14 – 15
Plate
Map Legend
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
This page intentionally left blank 
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
A Coruña
!Abb)s
dian prime minister (1891–92). Educated at McGill University in Mon-
treal, he became a lawyer in 1847 and was made queen’s counsel in 1862.
He was dean of McGill University law school from 1855 to 1880. After
serving in the legislative assembly (1857–74, 1880–87), he was appointed
to the Senate and became government leader. Upon the death of JOHN
MACDONALD, he became the compromise choice for prime minister. Ill
health forced his resignation in 1892.
abbreviation Shortened form of a written word or phrase used in place
of the whole. Abbreviations began to proliferate in the 19th century and
have been prevalent since; they are employed to reduce the time required
for writing or speaking, especially when referring to the myriad new
organizations, bureaucratic entities, and technological products typical of
industrial societies. An abbreviation can now easily become a word, either
as an initialism in which the letters are pronounced individually (e.g., TV
or FBI) or as an acronym in which the letters are combined into syllables
(e.g., scuba, laser, or NAFTA).
ABC in full American Broadcasting Co. Major U.S. television
network. It began when the expanding national radio network NBC split
into the separate Red and Blue networks in 1928. To avoid a communi-
cations monopoly, NBC was forced to sell the Blue network in 1941. Its
buyer, Edward J. Noble, maker of Life-Savers candies, gave the company
its present name. After merging with United Paramount Theaters in 1953,
ABC expanded into the emerging television industry and soon became
one of the three top networks. It specialized in sports broadcasting and
developed the instant replay in 1961. It was bought by Capital Cities
Communications in 1985 and by the Walt Disney Co. in 1995.
!Abd al-!Azlz ibn !Abd al-Raem)n ibn FayÆal 0l Sa!)d See
IBN SA!ãD
!Abd al-Malik ibn Marw)n
Abbott, Bud; and Costello, Lou orig. William Alexander
Abbott, Sir
John (Joseph
Caldwell) (b. March 12, 1821, St.
Andrews, Lower Canada—d. Oct. 30, 1893, Montreal, Que., Can.) Cana-
ama, which included about 1,400 paintings. Favoured at court, in 1576
he was appointed master of the mint, and in 1584 he was made dlw)n
(revenue commissioner) of Multan.
!Abd All)h
Abenaki
DIAMOND, CORUNDUM, EMER Y) or synthetic (e.g., silicon CARBIDE or CARBORUN-
DUM, synthetic diamond, alumina—a synthetic form of corundum). They
range from the relatively soft particles used in household cleansers and
jeweler’s polish to diamonds.
Abruzzo
Abnaki See ABENAKI
abnormal psychology or psychopathology Branch of psychol-
LEAF WHITTIER, former slaves such as FREDERICK DOUGLASS, and HARRIET BEECHER
STOWE. The election of ABRAHAM LINCOLN, who opposed the spread of sla-
very to the West, marked a turning point in the movement. Convinced
that their way of life was threatened, the Southern states seceded from the
Union (see SECESSION), which led to the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR. In 1863 Lin-
coln (who had never been an abolitionist) issued the EMANCIPATION PROC-
LAMATION, which freed slaves held in the Confederate states; the 13th
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution (1865) prohibited slavery through-
out the country. Slavery was abolished in Latin America by 1888. In some
parts of Africa and in much of the Islamic world, it persisted as a legal
institution well into the 20th century.
Abominable Snowman Tibetan Yeti Mythical monster believed to
inhabit the HIMALAYAS near the snow line. The Yeti is thought to resemble
an oversized man covered with shaggy fur. Reported sightings are rare;
evidence of its existence consists largely of unusual footprints left in the
snow, probably the tracks of bears. At certain gaits, bears place the hind-
foot partly over the imprint of the forefoot, thus creating tracks that
resemble the footprints of a very large primate heading in the opposite
direction.
Aborigine See AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINAL
abortion Expulsion of a fetus from the uterus before it can survive on
its own. Spontaneous abortion at earlier stages of pregnancy is called MIS-
CARRIAGE. Induced abortions often occur through intentional medical inter-
vention and are performed to preserve the woman’s life or health, to
prevent the completion of a pregnancy resulting from rape or incest, to
prevent the birth of a child with serious medical problems, or because the
woman does not believe she is in a position to rear a child properly. The
drug RU-486, if taken within a few weeks of conception, will trigger a
miscarriage. Up to about 19 weeks of pregnancy, injections of saline
solutions or hormones may be used to stimulate uterine contractions that
will expel the fetus. Surgical removal of the contents of the uterus may
be performed in the second trimester or later. Intact dilation and extrac-
tion procedures may occur in the third trimester; sometimes critically
referred to as “partial-birth abortions,” they have been very controversial.
Other abortion procedures include manual vacuum aspiration (extraction
by manual syringe) and dilation and suction curettage (extraction by
machine-operated suction), both of which can be performed in early preg-
abscess
ing from various discontented groups, he succeeded in overthrowing the
last Umayyad caliph, Marw)n II (750), and was rewarded with the gov-
ernorship of Khor)s)n. His popularity led the second !Abb)sid caliph,
al-ManÆHr, to view him as a threat and have him put to death. See also
!ABB0SID DYNASTY.
Ab) Qlr
Acadian orogeny
Accra
Acheulean
Acosta
actinide
acupressure or shiatsu
Adams, Charles Francis (b. Aug. 18, 1807, Boston, Mass., U.S.—d.
Nov. 21, 1886, Boston) U.S. diplo-
mat. The son of JOHN QUINCY ADAMS
and the grandson of JOHN ADAMS, he
served in the Massachusetts legisla-
ture and edited a Whig journal. He
helped form the antislavery FREE-SOIL
PARTY and in 1848 was chosen its can-
didate for U.S. vice president. As
ambassador to Britain (1861–68) he
was instrumental in securing Brit-
ain’s neutrality during the American
Civil War and in promoting the arbi-
tration of the ALABAMA CLAIMS.
Adams, Gerry orig. Gerard
Adams (b. Oct. 6, 1948, Belfast,
N.Ire.) Irish nationalist and president
of SINN FÉIN, the political wing of the
IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (IRA). He was
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, WASHINGTON, D.C.
Charles Francis Adams
delegate to the CONTINENTAL CONGRESS
INDEPENDENCE.
John Adams, oil painting by Gilbert
Stuart, 1826; in the National Collec-
tion of Fine Arts, Washington, D.C.
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL COLLECTION OF FINE ARTS,
SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION, WASHINGTON D.C.
Adams (cid:2) Adamson
MUTINY case.
Adamson, Joy orig. Joy-Friederike Victoria Gessner (b. Jan.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
She later repeated her rehabilitation success with cheetah and leopard
cubs. In addition to writing other books, she founded the Elsa Wild Ani-
mal Appeal (1961), an international conservation fund. She was killed by
a disgruntled employee.
Adamson, Robert See HILL, David Octavius, and Robert Adamson
Adana
New Guinea in 1946. When Papua New Guinea attained independence in
1975, the islands became part of that country.
admiralty law See MARITIME LAW
adobe
Adler, Larry orig. Lawrence Cecil Adler (b. Feb. 10, 1914, Bal-
Admiralty, High Court of See HIGH COURT OF ADMIRALTY
adrenaline See EPINEPHRINE
Adrian
include direct mail (see DIRECT-MAIL MARKETING), billboards and posters, tran-
sit advertising, the Internet, and promotional items such as matchbooks or
calendars. Advertisers attempt to choose media that are favoured by the
advertisers’ target audience. See also MARKETING; MERCHANDISING.
Aeroflot
Aethelberht I See ETHELBERT I
Aethelred Unraed See ETHELRED II
Aetolia
AFL-CIO in full American Federation of Labor-Congress of
See also LANE KIRKLAND; KNIGHTS OF LABOR; WALTER REUTHER.
!Aflaq
African Methodist Episcopal Church (AME Church) African
African National Congress (ANC) South African political party
Africa. See also INKATHA FREEDOM PARTY; ALBERT LUTULI; PAN-AFRICAN MOVEMENT.
WITCHCRAFT AND SORCER Y.
Afrikaans
begun a scramble to partition the continent, and by 1920 much of it was
under colonial rule. Anticolonial sentiment developed gradually, becom-
ing widespread after 1950, and one by one the colonies became indepen-
dent, the last in 1990. Political instability, refugee problems, famine, and
AIDS are the chief problems facing the continent at the start of the 21st
century. See map on following page.
Africa Proconsular Roman province. It was founded after Rome defeated
CARTHAGE in 146 BC and was subsequently extended to include NUMIDIA and
the northern part of modern Libya. Between 30 BC and AD 180, other parts
of northern Africa, including CYRENAICA and Mauretania, became part of
the ROMAN REPUBLIC AND EMPIRE. In the 5th century the region was taken by
the VANDALS, though areas were later reconquered by the BYZANTINE (Eastern
Roman) Empire; the Muslims conquered the area in the late 7th century.
Africa, Horn of See HORN OF AFRICA
African ant bear See AARDVARK
BULI STYLE; DÉBLÉ; SEGONI-KUN; TELUM FIGURE; TRICKSTER TALE; and African authors
by name, such as CHINUA ACHEBE; AIMÉ CÉSAIRE; BIRAGO DIOP; ATHOL FUGARD;
NADINE GORDIMER; WOLE SOYINKA; AMOS TUTUOLA.
African languages Languages indigenous to Africa that belong to the
NIGER-CONGO, NILO-SAHARAN, KHOISAN, and AFRO-ASIATIC language phyla.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
aftosa See FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE
Aga Khan
See also CAPE TOWN; GREAT TREK; NATIONAL PARTY.
Afro-Asiatic languages formerly Hamito-Semitic languages
Afro-Caribbean, Afro-Brazilian, and Afro-American reli-
on an 1875 trip to the western coast of South America led him to chal-
lenge CHARLES DARWIN’s theory of coral reef formation.
Agassiz, Elizabeth Cabot orig. Elizabeth Cabot Cary (b. Dec.
Agassiz
ageratum
FERTILIZERS, HERBICIDES, and INSECTICIDES. Most are mixtures of two or more
Aguán
Aemadiyyah
graphed for the company included its
signature Revelations (1960), set to
black spirituals. From the 1960s to
the 1980s,
the company toured
worldwide, and Ailey became one of
the best-known U.S. choreographers.
Ailly
Airedale terrier
SALLY ANNE THOMPSON/EB INC.
airbrush (cid:2) airship
and landing. See also AIRFOIL; AVIATION; GLIDER; HELICOPTER.
Two physical forces essential to airplane flight are thrust and lift. Jet engines, such
as the turbofan shown, provide forward thrust by taking in air through the front of
the engine, compressing it, and burning it with fuel in the combustor. Hot exhaust
gases and air are then expelled at high speed from the rear of the engine. Lift is
generated by the flow of air past the wings. Air flowing over the rounded upper
surface of a wing moves faster than air flowing past the flat lower surface; as a
result, the air above the wing exerts a lower pressure than the air below, producing
a net upward force, or lift. Both lift and drag (friction caused by the plane moving
through air) can be adjusted by the movement of ailerons, landing flaps, and tabs
on the wings’ edges. At the rear of the plane, the elevator, located on the horizon-
tal stabilizer, controls the airplane’s movement around the lateral axis. Both the
elevator and the rudder, located on the vertical stabilizer, help to control turning
movements initiated by the ailerons.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
!0#ishah
Shortly after his reign began, he began to encourage the exclusive wor-
ship of the little-known deity ATON, a sun god he regarded as the source
of all blessings. Assuming the name Akhenaton (“One Useful to Aton”),
he moved his capital from Thebes to present-day TELL EL-AMARNA to escape
established religious powers and make a fresh start. A new art style that
focused on the details of actual life rather than on timeless conditions
became popular. In government, Akhenaton tried to recapture the old
authority of the ruler, which had been largely diverted to bureaucrats and
officials, but his focus on his new religion to the exclusion of affairs of
state resulted in the disintegration of Egypt’s Asian empire. He was suc-
ceeded by two of his sons-in-law, Smenkhkare and TUTANKHAMEN, but after
Tutankhamen’s early death the army took over
the throne, and
Akhenaton’s new religion was abandoned.
Akhmatova
Alaca Hüyük
NATIONAL PARK AND PRESERVE, ANIAKCHAK NATIONAL MONUMENT AND PRESERVE,
Alaskan king crab See KING CRAB
Alaskan malamute Sled dog developed by the Malemiut, an Eskimo
group. It is a strongly built dog with a broad head, erect ears, and a
plumelike tail carried over its back. Its thick coat is usually gray and white
or black and white, the colours frequently forming a caplike or masklike
marking on the head. It stands 23–25 in. (58–64 cm) tall and weighs 75–85
lbs (34–39 kg). Characteristically loyal and friendly, it has served on
expeditions to the Antarctic.
Alaungpaya
GUAGES, and TURKISH.
Albany
Albigensian
main maritime trade routes of the East and to build permanent fortresses
with settled populations. His conquests were inspired by the Crusading
spirit of King John II, rather than by considerations of mercantile gain.
Alcaeus
Alcuin
Aldrich
Aleutian
Alexander Nevsky
the land assemblies fell into gradual disuse, the professional bureaucracy
and regular army grew in importance, and patriarch NIKON’s reforms of
the Russian Orthodox church were adopted. Though reportedly warm-
hearted and popular, Alexis was a weak ruler who sometimes entrusted
matters of state to incompetent favourites.
Alexius I Comnenus
algae
lowed, most prominently the ALMORAVID (c.
1054–1130), which extended its domain to
Spain, and the ALMOHAD (c. 1130–1269).
The BARBAR Y COAST pirates menaced Medi-
terranean trade for centuries; their raids served as a pretext for France to
enter Algeria in 1830. By 1847 France had established military control
over most of the region and by the late 19th century had instituted civil
rule. Popular protest against French rule resulted in the bloody ALGERIAN
WAR (1954–61); independence was achieved following a referendum in
1962. Beginning in the early 1990s, Islamic fundamentalist opposition to
secular rule led to an outbreak in civil violence between the army and
various Islamic extremist groups.
Algerian Reformist !Ulam)#
MU!0WIYAH.
Ali, Muhammad orig. Cassius (Marcellus) Clay (b. Jan. 17,
Aliákmon
ATOMS have only one ELECTRON in the outermost shell, they are very reac-
tive chemically (they react rapidly, even violently, with water), form
numerous compounds, and are never found free in nature.
alkaline earth metal Any of the six chemical ELEMENTS in the second
leftmost group of the PERIODIC TABLE (BER YLLIUM, MAGNESIUM, CALCIUM, STRONTIUM,
Allahabad
Allen, Steve orig. Stephen Valentine Patrick William Allen
Allen, Woody orig. Allen Stewart Konigsberg (b. Dec. 1, 1935,
Allenby (of Megiddo and of Felixstowe), Edmund Henry
Allende
Allingham
Almendros
Alsatian See GERMAN SHEPHERD
Altai Mountains Russian Altay
Altgeld, John Peter (b. Dec. 30, 1847, Niederselters, Prussia—d.
March 12, 1902, Joliet, Ill., U.S.) German-born U.S. politician, governor
of Illinois (1893–97). He emigrated from Germany as a child. In the 1870s
he moved to Chicago, where he accumulated a small fortune in real estate
and became active in Democratic Party politics. In 1892 he won the gov-
ernorship as a reformist candidate. In 1893, at the urging of CLARENCE DAR-
ROW and labour leaders, he granted clemency to three men convicted of
complicity in the HAYMARKET RIOT. The controversial pardon provoked an
outcry from conservatives and contributed to his defeat for reelection in
1896, though Altgeld’s decision later gained wide approval in judicial
circles.
altimeter
He was governor of Guatemala in 1527–31. In 1539 he began an explo-
ration of central Mexico, but died while quelling an Indian uprising.
Alvarez
amaranth
Ambon
58 I American Association (cid:2) American Indian Movement
try (see ABOLITIONISM). Cofounded in 1833 by WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON and
ARTHUR TAPPAN, it promoted the formation of state and local auxiliaries to
agitate for abolition. Despite violent opposition, by 1840 the group had
2,000 auxiliaries and more than 150,000 members, including THEODORE
WELD and WENDELL PHILLIPS. Its most effective public meetings featured tes-
timony by former slaves, including FREDERICK DOUGLASS and WILLIAM WELLS
BROWN. In 1839 it split into two factions: a radical group led by Garrison
that denounced the Constitution as supportive of slavery and a moderate
faction led by Tappan that led to the birth of the LIBERTY PARTY.
American Association of Retired Persons See AARP
American Ballet Theatre Prominent ballet company based in New
York City. It was founded in 1939 as the Ballet Theatre (the name was
changed in 1958) by Lucia Chase and Richard Pleasant to promote works
“American in character.” Oliver Smith replaced Pleasant as codirector in
1945; MIKHAIL BAR YSHNIKOV served as artistic director from 1980 to 1989
after dancing with the company in the 1970s. New ballets were created
for the company by AGNES DE MILLE, JEROME ROBBINS, TWYLA THARP, and ANT-
ONY TUDOR; MICHEL FOKINE revived many of his earlier works for them as
well. Principal dancers have included ALICIA ALONSO, ERIK BRUHN, ANTON
DOLIN, and NATALIA MAKAROVA.
American Bar Association (ABA) Voluntary association (founded
1878) of U.S. lawyers, judges, and other legal professionals. The largest
bar association in the U.S., it seeks to improve the legal profession, ensure
the availability of legal services to all citizens, and improve the admin-
istration of justice. It conducts educational and research projects, spon-
sors professional meetings, and publishes a monthly journal. At the
beginning of the 21st century its membership exceeded 400,000.
American Broadcasting Co. See ABC
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) Organization founded by
American Civil War or Civil War or War Between the States
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
American Federation of Labor–Congress of Industrial
Organizations See AFL–CIO
American Indian or Native American or Amerindian Any
member of the various aboriginal peoples of the Western Hemisphere,
with the exception of the ESKIMOs (Inuit) and the ALEUTs. Though the term
Native American is today often preferred over American Indian, particu-
larly in the U.S., many Native American peoples continue to prefer Ameri-
can Indian (or Indian). In Canada the name First Nation is preferred. The
ancestors of the American Indians were nomadic hunters of northeast Asia
who migrated over the Bering Strait land bridge into North America prob-
ably during the last glacial period (20,000–30,000 years ago). By c.
10,000 BC they had occupied much of North, Central, and South America.
See also ANASAZI CULTURE; ANDEAN CIVILIZATION; CLOVIS COMPLEX; EASTERN
WOODLANDS INDIAN; FOLSOM COMPLEX; HOHOKAM CULTURE; HOPEWELL CULTURE;
MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION; MISSISSIPPIAN CULTURE; MOGOLLON CULTURE; NORTH-
WEST COAST INDIAN; PLAINS INDIAN; PUEBLO INDIAN; SOUTHEASTERN INDIAN; SOUTH-
WEST INDIAN; WOODLAND CULTURE.
QUOIAN, SIOUAN, MUSKOGEAN, ATHABASKAN, UTO-AZTECAN, SALISHAN) account
for many of the languages of eastern and interior North America, though
the far west was an area of extreme diversity (see HOKAN; PENUTIAN). It is
estimated that in Mexico and northern Central America (Mesoamerica),
an estimated 15–20 million people spoke more than 300 languages before
Columbus. The large OTOMANGUEAN and MAYA families and a single lan-
guage, NAHUATL, shared Mesoamerica with many smaller families and lan-
guage isolates. More than 10 of these languages and language complexes
still have more than 100,000 speakers. South America and the West Indies
had an estimated pre-Columbian population of 10–20 million, speaking
more than 500 languages. Important language families include Chibchan
in Colombia and southern Central America, QUECHUAN and Aymaran in
the Andean region, and ARAWAKAN, CARIBAN, and TUPIAN in northern and
central lowland South America. Aside from Quechuan and Aymaran, with
about 10 million speakers, and the TUPIAN language Guaraní, most remain-
ing South American Indian languages have very few speakers, and some
face certain extinction.
American Indian Movement (AIM) Civil rights organization
founded in 1968, originally to help urban AMERICAN INDIANs displaced by
government programs. It later broadened its efforts to include demands
for economic independence, autonomy over tribal areas, restoration of
illegally seized lands, and protection of Indian legal rights and traditional
culture. Some of its protest activities involved violence and were highly
publicized (see WOUNDED KNEE). Internal strife and the imprisonment of
some leaders led to the disbanding of its national leadership in 1978,
though local groups have continued to function.
American Indian religions, North Religious beliefs and practices
DANCE tradition and the NATIVE AMERICAN CHURCH. See also MESOAMERICAN
RELIGIONS.
American Indian religions, South Religious beliefs and practices
MESOAMERICAN RELIGIONS.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
American Indian religions (cid:2) American Revolution
American Legion Organization of U.S. war veterans. Founded in
1919, it works for the care of disabled and sick veterans and promotes
compensation and pensions for the disabled, widows, and orphans. Non-
political and nonsectarian, its membership requirement is honourable ser-
vice and an honourable discharge. It was instrumental in establishing
veterans’ hospitals, and it sponsored the creation of the U.S. Veterans
Administration in 1930. In 1944 it played an important role in the pas-
sage of the GI BILL. The American Legion claims about three million mem-
bers in some 15,000 local posts, or groups.
American Medical Association (AMA) Organization of U.S. phy-
sicians. It was founded in 1847 “to promote the science and art of medi-
cine and the betterment of public health.” It has about 250,000 members,
about half of all practicing U.S. physicians. It disseminates information
to its members and the public, operates as a lobbying group, and helps
set medical education standards. Its publications include Journal of the
American Medical Association, American Medical News, and journals on
medical specialties.
American Motors Corp. (AMC) Former U.S. automobile manufac-
turer. AMC was formed in 1954 from the merger of two pioneering auto
manufacturers, Nash-Kelvinator Corp. (successor to Nash Motor Co.,
founded 1916) and Hudson Motor Car Co. (founded 1909). AMC pro-
duced AMC compact cars, AM General trucks and buses, and, until 1968,
Kelvinator appliances. Jeeps joined the product line after AMC purchased
the Kaiser-Jeep Corp. (dating to 1903) in 1970. AMC became a subsid-
iary of CHR YSLER CORP. in 1987, which in turn merged with Daimler-Benz
in 1998 to form DAIMLERCHR YSLER AG.
American Museum of Natural History Major centre of research
American Party See KNOW-NOTHING PARTY
American Protective Association (APA) Secret anti-Catholic,
anti-immigrant society formed in Iowa in 1887. Its membership, consist-
ing mainly of farmers who feared the growth and political power of
immigrant-populated cities, rose to more than two million in the 1890s.
Membership dwindled after the election of 1896 and the return of agri-
cultural prosperity in the Midwest. By 1911 the society had disappeared.
American Renaissance or New England Renaissance Period
American Revolution or United States War of Indepen-
CR YSTAL PALACE exhibition (1851) did British engineers, viewing exhibits of
machines used in the U.S. to produce INTERCHANGEABLE PARTS, begin to apply
the system. Within 25 years, the American System was being widely used
in making a host of industrial products. See also ASSEMBLY LINE; FACTOR Y.
American Telephone and Telegraph Co. See AT&T
americium
American Saddlebred or American Saddle Horse Breed of
American Stock Exchange (AMEX) Stock exchange in the U.S.
Originally known as “the Curb,” it began as an outdoor marketplace in
New York City c. 1850. It moved indoors to its present location in the
Wall Street area in 1921. Once a marketplace for SECURITIES not reputable
enough for the NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE, it became equally respectable,
with its own listing admissions requirements. In 1998 it merged with the
National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD), then-owner of the
NASDAQ exchange, to form the Nasdaq-Amex Market Group. After
NASD sold its interest in the NASDAQ in 2000, AMEX remained a
NASD subsidiary.
American System of manufacture Production of many identical
Ethiopia’s population. Their language is Amharic, a Semitic language of
the AFRO-ASIATIC family, and their religion is ETHIOPIAN ORTHODOX. The
Amhara, who have dominated the history of their country, descend from
ancient Semitic conquerors who mingled with indigenous Cushitic
peoples. They are agriculturalists and place great value on land owner-
ship.
Amharic
Amish
formed in the 1930s, amniocentesis is generally done under local
anesthesia in the 15th–17th week of gestation.
amoeba
after the stone blocks arranged themselves into walls at the sound of
Amphion’s lyre. Amphion became king of Thebes, and he married NIOBE,
with whom he had six sons and six daughters. When their children were
killed by the gods, he committed suicide.
amphioxus
ZEOLITES.
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
anamorphosis
FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS. See also NUMERICAL ANALYSIS.
the DISTANCE FORMULA.
2001). See also LOGICAL POSITIVISM; VIENNA CIRCLE.
Anastasia Russian Anastasiya Nikolayevna (b. June 18, 1901,
Anastasius
SCHOOLING BEHAVIOUR.
ancien régime
Anderson, (James) Maxwell
ing the AMAZON and PILCOMAYO.
andesite
its institutions are based in Catalonian law, and it is part of the diocese
of Urgel (Spain). The traditional economy was based on sheep raising,
but tourism grew in importance since the 1950s and became central to
Andorra’s economy by the early 21st century.
Andorra la Vella
two—The Bridge on the Drina (1945) and Bosnian Story (1945)—are
about the history of Bosnia. He was awarded the Nobel Prize for Litera-
ture in 1961.
androgen
ing; aortic aneurysm rupture causes severe pain and immediate collapse.
Rupture of an aneurysm in the brain is a major cause of STROKES. Treat-
ment can consist of simply tying off a small vessel; more serious aneu-
rysms require surgery to replace the diseased section of artery with a
plastic graft.
Angara
built c. 1200 by King JAYAVARMAN VII. During the period of great construc-
tion that lasted more than 300 years, there were many changes in archi-
tecture as the religious focus changed from Hindu to Buddhist cults. After
the Siamese conquest of the Khmer in the 15th century, the ruined city
and its temples were buried in the jungle. When the French colonial
regime was established in 1863, the entire site became the focus of schol-
arly interest. During Cambodia’s political upheavals of the late 20th cen-
tury there was some war damage, but the major problem was one of
neglect. Angkor was added to the WORLD HERITAGE SITE list in 1992.
Angkor Wat
Angoulême
Anhui or An-hui conventional Anhwei
anion
been used by the indigenous inhabitants). It became independent in the
15th century AD, opening the way for steady Vietnamese movement
toward the MEKONG RIVER delta. When Vietnam was united in 1802, the
city of HUE became the capital, and the area was ruled by the emperor of
Annam. Central Vietnam gradually came under French control in the 19th
century; it became a protectorate in 1883–85, leaving the court at Hue
with only nominal power. The area was partitioned between North and
South Vietnam in 1954; Annam’s last emperor had abdicated in 1945 but
served as Vietnam’s chief of state from 1949 until shortly after partition.
Annan
anomie
Anshan
anteater Any of four species of toothless, insect-eating placental mam-
mals. Found in tropical savannas and forests from Mexico to northern
Argentina and Uruguay, anteaters have a long tail, dense fur, a long skull,
and a tubular muzzle. Their mouth opening is small, and the tongue is
long and wormlike. They live alone or in pairs and feed mainly on ants
and termites, which they obtain byinserting their st icky tongue into a nest
torn open by the long, sharp, curved claws of their forefeet. The species
range in length from 15 in. (37 cm) to 6 ft (1.8 m). Once grouped together,
anteaters are now considered as separate from ECHIDNAS and PANGOLINS.
Antelami
domestic heating, but today they have given way to other sources of
energy (e.g., natural gas and electricity).
anthracnose
antiballistic missile (ABM) Weapon designed to intercept and
destroy ballistic MISSILEs. Effective ABM systems have been sought since
the Cold War, when the nuclear arms race raised the spectre of complete
destruction by unstoppable ballistic missiles. In the late 1960s both the
U.S. and the Soviet Union developed nuclear-armed ABM systems that
combined a high-altitude interceptor missile (the U.S. Spartan and Soviet
Galosh) with a terminal-phase interceptor (the U.S. Sprint and Soviet
Gazelle). Both sides were limited by the 1972 Treaty on Antiballistic
Missile Systems to one ABM location each; the U.S. dismantled its sys-
tem, while the Soviet Union deployed one around Moscow. During the
1980s the U.S. began research on an ambitious STRATEGIC DEFENSE INITIATIVE
against an all-out Soviet attack, but this effort proved expensive and tech-
nically difficult, and it lost urgency with the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Attention shifted to “theatre” systems such as the U.S. Patriot missile,
which was used with limited effect against conventionally armed Iraqi
Scud missiles during the Persian Gulf War (1990–91). In 2002 the U.S.
formally withdrew from the ABM treaty in order to develop a defense
against limited missile attack by smaller powers or “rogue” states.
Antibes
Antigonus I Monophthalmus
18th-century writer LAURENCE STERNE. Writers of such works include NATH-
ALIE SARRAUTE, CLAUDE SIMON, ALAIN ROBBE-GRILLET, Uwe Johnson, and Rayner
Heppenstall.
Antioch
combination…or conspiracy in restraint of trade or commerce.” The Clay-
ton Antitrust Act of 1914, as amended in 1936 by the Robinson-Patman
Act, prohibits discrimination among customers through prices or other
means; it also prohibits mergers or acquisitions whenever the effect may
be “to substantially lessen competition.” Labour unions are also subject
to antitrust laws.
antlion Insect (family Myrmeleontidae) known in its larval stage for its
aggressive capture of prey. The ant-
lion LARVA digs a funnel-shaped
sandy pit by using its oval, bristled
abdomen, then buries itself in the pit
with only its powerful jaws uncov-
ered. Any small insect that ventures
over the pit’s edge slips to the bot-
tom and is seized by the antlion,
which sucks the contents of its vic-
tim and throws out the empty skin.
The adult antlion does not feed. The
best known of the 65 described spe-
cies occurs in North America and Europe.
Antofagasta
antyesti
Apamea Cibotus
with subjects for which principles and methodology developed relatively
late, including art, agriculture, medicine, jurisprudence, and politics, but
in the modern era they have usually been vehicles of wit and pithy wis-
dom. Celebrated modern aphorists include FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE and OSCAR
WILDE.
aphrodisiac
Apollo asteroid See EARTH-CROSSING ASTEROID
Apollo Theatre During and after the HARLEM RENAISSANCE, a centre of
African-American popular music on 125th Street in New York City’s
Harlem district. Built in 1914, it hosted musical performers such as BILL
ROBINSON, BILLIE HOLIDAY, BESSIE SMITH, ETHEL WATERS, DUKE ELLINGTON, and oth-
ers in the 1930s and ’40s; stars such as ELLA FITZGERALD, SARAH VAUGHAN,
and JAMES BROWN were discovered on Wednesday amateur nights. In the
1960s the Apollo featured soul artists such as the SUPREMES, STEVIE WON-
DER, and MARVIN GAYE. Converted into a movie theatre in 1975, it was
reopened as a performance venue in 1983.
Apollonius Dyscolos
Appalachian Mountains Mountain system, eastern North America.
The Appalachians, among the oldest mountains on Earth, extend almost
2,000 mi (3,200 km) from the Canadian province of Newfoundland and
Labrador in the northeast southwestward to Alabama in the U.S. They
include the WHITE MOUNTAINS in New Hampshire, the GREEN MOUNTAINS in
Vermont, the CATSKILL MOUNTAINS in New York, the ALLEGHENY MOUNTAINS
primarily in Pennsylvania, the BLUE RIDGE Mountains in Virginia and North
Carolina, the GREAT SMOKY MOUNTAINS in North Carolina and Tennessee,
and the CUMBERLAND PLATEAU extending from West Virginia to Alabama.
Their highest peak is Mount MITCHELL in North Carolina. See also APPA-
LACHIAN GEOSYNCLINE; APPALACHIAN NATIONAL SCENIC TRAIL.
Appalachian National Scenic Trail Footpath, APPALACHIAN MOUN-
Appalachian orogenic
PSYCHOLOGY, and community psychology. See also INDUSTRIAL-ORGANIZATIONAL
PSYCHOLOGY; PSYCHOMETRICS.
appliqué See QUILTING
Appomattox
PICASSO, GEORGES ROUAULT, and ANDRÉ MASSON.
aquavit
try until 2000. See also Y0SIR !ARAF0T; h0FI- AL-ASSAD; MENACHEM BEGIN;
DAVID BEN-GURION; CAMP DAVID ACCORDS; MOSHE DAYAN; HEZBOLLAH; GAMAL
ABDEL NASSER; YITZHAK RABIN; SABRA AND SHATILA MASSACRES; ANWAR EL-S0D0T.
Arab League or League of Arab States Regional organization
Arabia See ARABIAN PENINSULA
Arabian Desert Desert region,
RAY MANLEY—SHOSTAL ASSOC./EB INC.
Arabesque decoration on the dome of
the Madar-i-Sh)h madrasah (“school”)
built by husayn I, early 18th century, at
EÆfah)n, Iran
ARABIAN PENINSULA. It covers about
900,000 sq mi (2,330,000 sq km),
occupying nearly the entire penin-
sula. It lies largely within SAUDI ARA-
BIA but
large portions extend into
Jordan,
Iraq, Kuwait, Qatar,
United Arab Emirates, Oman, and
Yemen. Its relief is broken by a num-
ber of mountain ranges, with eleva-
tions reaching as high as 12,000 ft (3,700 m), and it is bounded on three
sides by high escarpments. At least one-third of the desert is covered by
sand, including the RUB! AL-KHALI, considered to have one of the most
inhospitable climates on Earth. There are no perennial bodies of water,
though the TIGRIS-EUPHRATES river system lies to the northeast and the Wadi
hajr is located to the south, in Yemen. Humans have inhabited the area
since Pleistocene times.
Arabian horse Earliest improved breed of HORSE, valued for its speed,
stamina, beauty, intelligence, and gentleness. Its long history has been
obscured by legend, but it was developed in Arabia by the 7th century AD.
It has contributed its qualities to most modern breeds of light horses. It
is compact and relatively small, with a small head, protruding eyes, wide
nostrils, marked withers, and a short back. Its average height is about 15
hands (60 in. [152 cm]), its average weight 800–1,000 lbs (360–450 kg).
Though many colours are possible, gray is the most common.
Arabian Nights’ Entertainment See The THOUSAND AND ONE NIGHTS
Arabian Peninsula or Arabia Peninsular region, southwest Asia.
With its offshore islands, it covers about 1 million sq mi (2.6 million sq
km). Constituent countries are Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, United
Arab Emirates, Yemen, and, the largest, Saudi Arabia. It is generally arid
and is covered almost entirely by the ARABIAN DESERT. The modern economy
is dominated by the production of petroleum and natural gas. The world’s
largest proven reserves of those minerals are in the Arabian Peninsula. Its
political consolidation was begun by the Prophet MUHAMMAD, and it was
the centre of the orthodox caliphate until 661, when that office passed to
the UMAYYAD DYNASTY in DAMASCUS. After 1517 much of the region was
dominated by the OTTOMAN EMPIRE, though the peninsula’s people, who had
remained largely tribal and nomadic, revolted repeatedly until the World
War I (1914–18), when the Ottoman Empire dissolved. Thereafter, indi-
vidual nation-states followed their own histories, though many maintained
close ties with European powers such as the United Kingdom.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Arab League (cid:2) Arabic philosophy
some TURKIC languages, MALAY, SWAHILI, and HAUSA. The MALTESE LANGUAGE
Arabic philosophy or Islamic philosophy Doctrines of the Ara-
Spaniard AVERROËS, whose interpretations of ARISTOTLE were taken up by
both Jewish and Christian thinkers. Muslims, Christians, and Jews par-
ticipated in the Arabic tradition and separated themselves according to
philosophic rather than religious doctrines. When the Arabs dominated
Spain, the Arabic philosophic literature was translated into Hebrew and
Latin; this contributed to the development of modern European philoso-
phy. In Egypt around the same time, the Arabic tradition was developed
by MOSES MAIMONIDES and IBN KHALDUN.
Arachne
an alphabet of Phoenician origin found in the northern Levant dating from
c. 850 to 600 BC. The period 600–200 BC saw a dramatic expansion of
Aramaic, leading to the development of a standard form known as Impe-
rial Aramaic. In later centuries, as “Standard Literary Aramaic,” it became
a linguistic model. Late (or Classical) Aramaic (c. AD 200–1200) has an
abundant literature, both in Syriac and in Mandaic (see MANDAEANISM).
With the rise of Islam, Arabic rapidly supplanted Aramaic as a vernacu-
lar in South Asia. Modern Aramaic (Neo-Aramaic) comprises West Neo-
Aramaic, spoken in three villages northeast of Damascus, Syria, and East
Neo-Aramaic, a group of languages spoken in scattered settlements of
Jews and Christians in southeastern Turkey, northern Iraq, and northwest-
ern Iran, and by modern Mandaeans in the SHA’’ AL-!ARAB. Since c. 1900
persecution has forced most contemporary East Neo-Aramaic-speakers,
who number several hundred thousand, into diaspora communities around
the world.
Aramco
arboretum
archaebacteria
archetype
of the area within which, for one day or more each year, the sun does not
set or rise. The length of continuous day or night increases northward from
the Arctic Circle, mounting to six months at the NORTH POLE.
Arctic fox Northern FOX (Alopex lagopus) found throughout the Arctic,
usually on tundra or mountains near the sea. Its short, rounded ears and
short muzzle reduce its body area exposed to heat loss, and it has fur-
covered soles. It is 20–24 in. (50–60 cm) long (excluding the 12-in., or
30-cm, tail) and weighs 7–17 lbs (3–8 kg). It has two colour phases. Indi-
viduals in the white phase are grayish brown in summer and white in win-
ter; those in the blue phase (blue foxes of the fur trade) are grayish in
summer and gray-blue in winter. The Arctic fox dwells in burrows and
feeds on any available animal or vegetable material.
Arctic National Park, Gates of the See GATES OF THE ARCTIC
NATIONAL PARK
Arctic Ocean Ocean centring approximately on the NORTH POLE. Small-
est of the world’s oceans, it is almost completely surrounded by the land-
masses of Eurasia and North America, and it is distinguished by a cover
of ice. Lands in it and adjacent to it include Point Barrow in Alaska, the
ARCTIC ARCHIPELAGO, GREENLAND, SVALBARD, FRANZ JOSEF LAND, and northern
explorers included ROALD AMUNDSEN, FRIDTJOF NANSEN, ROBERT E. PEAR Y, and
RICHARD E. BYRD. Development of the area’s natural resources was spurred
by the discovery of oil in Alaska in the 1960s. Virtually all of the Arctic
has now been mapped. See map opposite.
Arctic tern TERN species (Sterna paradisaea) that makes the longest
annual migration of any bird. It breeds in the southerly reaches of the
Arctic and winters in the Antarctic, making its migration a round-trip of
nearly 22,000 mi (over 35,000 km). Its appearance—white with a black
cap and grayish wings—is similar to that of the common tern (S. hirundo),
its frequent companion.
Ardea
traced TOTALITARIANISM to 19th-century ANTI-SEMITISM, IMPERIALISM, and the dis-
integration of the traditional nation-state. Her highly controversial book
Eichmann in Jerusalem (1963) argued that the Nazi war criminal ADOLF
EICHMANN was not inwardly wicked or depraved but merely “thoughtless”;
his role in the extermination of the Jews thus epitomized the fearsome
“banality of evil” that had swept across Europe at the time. Resuming
contact with Heidegger in 1950, she claimed that his involvement with
the Nazis had been the “mistake” of a great philosopher. She taught at the
University of Chicago (1963–67) and thereafter at the New School for
Social Research in New York City.
Areopagus
Argerich
Arjan
Armageddon
Armenia, Little See LITTLE ARMENIA
AND EMPIRE and later from the BYZANTINE EMPIRE, the SELJãQ DYNASTY, the OTTO-
Armenian Secret Army to Liberate Armenia See ASALA
Armistice (Nov. 11, 1918) Agreement between Germany and the Allies
ending WORLD WAR I. Allied representatives met with a German delega-
tion in a railway carriage at Rethondes, France, to discuss terms. The
agreement was signed on Nov. 11, 1918, and the war ended at 11:00 AM
that day (“the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month”). The prin-
cipal term was that Germany would evacuate Belgium, France, and
Alsace-Lorraine. Negotiations formalizing the armistice were conducted
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Armenia (cid:2) Armour
at the PARIS PEACE CONFERENCE. Later a “stab in the back” legend developed
in Germany, asserting that the German military situation had not been
hopeless and that traitorous politicians had done the Allies’ bidding by
signing the Armistice.
Armory Show formally International Exhibition of Modern
Art Exhibition of painting and sculpture held in 1913 at the 69th Regi-
ment Armory in New York City. Conceived by its organizers, the Asso-
ciation of American Painters and Sculptors, as a selection of works
exclusively by U.S. artists, it evolved into a comprehensive look at cur-
rent European art movements, due in part to the advanced vision of asso-
ciation president Arthur B. Davies. Of the 1,300 works assembled, one-
third were European, tracing the evolution of modern art from FRANCISCO
DE GOYA to MARCEL DUCHAMP and VASILY KANDINSKY, with works representa-
tive of IMPRESSIONISM, SYMBOLISM, POST-IMPRESSIONISM, FAUVISM, and CUBISM.
Suit of 15th-century European plate armour.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
106 I armoured vehicle (cid:2) Arne
HAGUE CONVENTION (1899). The WASHINGTON CONFERENCE (1921–22) and the
KELLOGG-BRIAND PACT (1928) were broken without much fear of sanction.
U.S.-Soviet treaties to control nuclear weapons during the COLD WAR were
taken more seriously. In 1968 the two superpowers and Britain sponsored
the NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY (signed also by 59 other countries),
which committed signatory countries not to promote the spread, or pro-
liferation, of nuclear weapons to countries that did not already possess
them. See also NUCLEAR TEST-BAN TREATY; STRATEGIC ARMS LIMITATION TALKS; STRA-
TEGIC ARMS REDUCTION TALKS.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Orleans, he participated in marching,
riverboat, and cabaret bands. A child-
hood nickname, Satchelmouth, was
shortened to Satchmo and used
throughout his life. In 1922 he moved
to Chicago to join KING OLIVER’s Cre-
ole Jazz Band (see DIXIELAND). In 1924
he joined the FLETCHER HENDERSON
AP/WIDE WORLD PHOTOS
Louis Armstrong.
Neil Armstrong, 1969.
also AIR FORCE, CONSCRIPTION, GUERRILLA, MILITAR Y UNIT, MILITIA, U.S. ARMY.
Arnhem
to a class of HYDROCARBONs isolated from coal tar and distinguished by
odours much stronger than those of other classes of hydrocarbons. In
modern chemistry, aromaticity denotes the chemical behaviour, especially
the low reactivity, of this class of molecules related to their bonding. The
parent compound of this class is BENZENE (C6H6). See also HYDROGENATION.
arsenic poisoning Harmful
effects of ARSENIC compounds (in pesticides, chemotherapy drugs, paints,
etc.), most often from INSECTICIDE exposure. Susceptibility varies. Arsenic
is believed to combine with certain enzymes, interfering with cellular
metabolism. Symptoms of acute arsenic poisoning include nausea and
abdominal pain followed by circulatory collapse. Acute exposure to the
gas arsine causes destruction of red blood cells and kidney damage;
chronic exposure causes weakness, skin disorders, anemia, and nervous-
system disorders. Arsenic in urine and hair or nails is the key to diagno-
sis. Treatment
involves washing out
the stomach and promptly
administering the antidote dimercaprol.
Arsinoe
Art Nouveau
arthritis
with the rail line passing through the Otira Tunnel (5.3 mi [8.6 km]).
Arthur’s Pass National Park was created in 1929.
Artibonite River
arugula
greatly exacerbates its symptoms. LUNG CANCER and malignant mesothe-
lioma are more common with asbestos inhalation and asbestosis.
Ascalon See ASHQELON
Ascanius
accused by the Mu!tazilah of believing in predestination because they
claimed the human capacity for action was only acquired at the very
moment of action.
Ashbery, John (Lawrence) (b. July 28, 1927, Rochester, N.Y., U.S.)
U.S. poet. He earned degrees from Harvard and Columbia universities
and subsequently became known as an art critic. His poems, noted for
their elegance, originality, and obscurity, are characterized by arresting
images, exquisite rhythms, intricate form, and sudden shifts in tone and
subject. His collections include The Double Dream of Spring (1970),
Self-Portrait in a Convex Mirror (1975, Pulitzer Prize, National Book
Award), A Wave (1984), Flow Chart (1991), and Wakefulness (1998).
Ashcroft, Dame Peggy orig. Edith Margaret Emily Ashcroft
Ashgabat
Ashurbanipal
aspartame
assaying
were placed on reservations. Some
3,900 people claimed sole Assini-
boin descent in the 2000 U.S. census.
There
somewhat
fewer
Canada.
Assiniboine
and Elath. Astarte shared many qualities, and perhaps a common origin,
with her sister ANATH. The goddess of love and war, Astarte was worshiped
in Egypt and in Canaan, as well as among the Hittites. Her Akkadian
counterpart was ISHTAR. She is often mentioned in the Bible under the name
Ashtaroth; SOLOMON is said to have worshipped the goddess, and JOSIAH
destroyed the shrines dedicated to her. In Egypt she was assimilated with
ISIS and HATHOR; in the Greco-Roman world she was assimilated with APH-
RODITE, ARTEMIS, and JUNO.
OID; TROJAN ASTEROIDS.
asthenosphere
GAMMA-RAY ASTRONOMY; INFRARED ASTRONOMY; RADIO AND RADAR ASTRONOMY;
ULTRAVIOLET ASTRONOMY; X-RAY ASTRONOMY.
astrophysics Branch of ASTRONOMY concerned mainly with the proper-
ties and structures of cosmic objects, including the universe as a whole.
Starting in the 19th century, SPECTROSCOPY and photography were applied
to astronomical research, making it possible to study the brightness, tem-
perature, and chemical composition of cosmic objects. It was soon real-
ized that the properties of these bodies could be fully understood only in
terms of the physics of their atmospheres and interiors. X-RAY ASTRONOMY,
GAMMA-RAY ASTRONOMY, INFRARED ASTRONOMY, ULTRAVIOLET ASTRONOMY, and RADIO
AND RADAR ASTRONOMY are all basically concerned with extending electro-
magnetic coverage beyond the visible spectrum to constrain the physical
characteristics of astronomical objects.
Astruc
Atacama
Athabaskan languages or Athapaskan languages Family
Athanasius
there were 40 monasteries. Long regarded as the holy mountain of the
GREEK ORTHODOX CHURCH, it was declared a theocratic republic in 1927. Its
churches and libraries house a rich collection of Byzantine art and ancient
and medieval manuscripts.
Athyr See HATHOR
Atitlán
Atlas, Charles orig. Angelo Siciliano (b. Oct. 30, 1893, Acri,
atman
Aton or Aten
also HYDROGEN BOMB; NUCLEAR NON-
PROLIFERATION TREATY; NUCLEAR WEAPON.
atomic number Number of a
QUANTUM MECHANICS and QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS. The primary tools for the
sonal atonement (see CONFESSION). In Judaism the annual Day of Atone-
ment, YOM KIPPUR, is the culmination of 10 days centered on repentance.
Atonement, Day of See YOM KIPPUR
ATP in full adenosine triphosphate
Attica Greek Attiki
augite
IGOR STRAVINSKY.
Audubon, John James orig. Fougère Rabin or Jean Rabin
later Jean-Jacques Fougère Audubon (b. April 26, 1785, Les
Augustine
Aurelian
Australian Aboriginal languages Group of perhaps as many as
500 languages spoken by the 300,000 to 1,000,000 native inhabitants of
Australia before the beginning of European conquest in 1788. More than
half are now extinct; of the remainder, only about 20, mostly in the North
Territory and northern Western Australia, remain in active use by both
adults and children. Most Australian languages belong to a single super-
family, Pama-Nyungan, and the remainder, a very diverse group of lan-
guages spoken in the Kimberley region of Western Australia and parts of
the North Territory, may be remotely akin to Pama-Nyungan.
Australian Aborigine
Austerlitz, Battle of (Dec. 2, 1805) First engagement of the War of
the Third Coalition and one of NAPOLEON’s greatest victories. In the battle,
fought near Austerlitz in Moravia (now Slavkov u Brna, Czech Rep.),
Napoleon’s 68,000 troops defeated almost 90,000 Russians and Austrians
under Russia’s ALEXANDER I and MIKHAIL KUTUZOV. Also called the Battle of
the Three Emperors, Napoleon’s resounding victory forced Austria’s
FRANCIS I to conclude the Treaty of Pressburg, ceding Venetia to the French
kingdom in Italy and temporarily ending the anti-French alliance. See also
NAPOLEONIC WARS.
Australian National University Public university in Canberra,
Australopithecus
REMAINS;
HUMAN EVOLUTION; LAETOLI FOOTPRINTS;
LUCY; OLDUVAI GORGE; STERKFONTEIN.
Austrasia
of Italy in 1882 made it the TRIPLE ALLIANCE. The agreement remained an
important element of both German and Austro-Hungarian foreign policy
until 1918.
Austro-Hungarian Empire See AUSTRIA-HUNGAR Y
Austro-Prussian War See SEVEN WEEKS’ WAR
Austroasiatic languages Superfamily of about 150 languages spo-
ken by close to 90 million physically and culturally very diverse people
in South and Southeast Asia. Today most scholars believe that it is sub-
divided into two families, MUNDA and MON-KHMER. The present fragmented
distribution of Austroasiatic languages is most likely the result of rela-
tively
recent
incursions
AUSTRONESIAN-speaking peoples. In prehistoric times Austroasiatic lan-
guages most likely extended over a much broader and more continuous
area, including much of what is now southeastern China. Other than VIET-
NAMESE and KHMER, no Austroasiatic language is an official national lan-
guage.
INDO-AR YAN, SINO-TIBETAN,
Austronesian languages formerly Malayo-Polynesian lan-
auteur
See also AXLE, BRAKE, BUS, CARBURETOR, ELECTRIC AUTOMOBILE, FUEL INJECTION, MOTOR-
CYCLE, TRUCK.
automobile racing Sport practiced in a variety of forms on roads,
tracks, or closed circuits. It includes GRAND PRIX RACING, speedway racing
(including the INDIANAPOLIS 500), STOCK-CAR RACING, SPORTS-CAR RACING, DRAG
RACING, midget-car racing, and KARTING, as well as hill climbs and RALLY DRIV-
ING. The International Motor Sports Hall of Fame is located in Talladega,
Ala., U.S. There is no central governing body for automobile racing in
the U.S. as there is in most other countries.
autonomic
paya founded the Konbaung dynasty in the 18th century, Ava served as
its capital for a time, and even after the dynasty built Amarapura and
Mandalay, its seat was often referred to as the “Court of Ava.”
avalanche Large mass of material, such as snow or rock debris, that
moves rapidly down a mountain slope, sweeping everything in its path.
Avalanches begin when a mass of material overcomes the frictional resis-
tance of the sloping surface, often after the material’s foundation has been
weakened by rains or the snow has been partially melted by a warm, dry
wind. Other weather conditions that can lead to avalanches are heavy
snowfall and high winds. A common method of avalanche control con-
sists of detonating explosives in the upper reaches of avalanche zones,
which intentionally causes the snow to slide before accumulations have
become very great.
Avalokitesvara
to spiritual leaders; Vendidad, the main source for Zoroastrian law; the
Yashts, 21 hymns to angels and ancient heroes; and the Khurda avesta,
composed of minor texts.
Avestan
AWACS
Aying or A Ying
Turks, and Iranians. Russia acquired what
is now independent Azerbaijan in the early
19th century. After the RUSSIAN REVOLUTION
OF 1917, Azerbaijan declared its indepen-
dence; it was subdued by the Red Army in
1920 and was incorporated into the Soviet Union. It declared indepen-
dence from the collapsing Soviet Union in 1991. Azerbaijan has two geo-
graphic peculiarities. The exclave Naxçivan (Nakhichevan) is separated
from the rest of Azerbaijan by Armenian territory. NAGORNO-KARABAKH,
which lies within Azerbaijan and is administered by it, has a Christian
Armenian majority. Azerbaijan and Armenia went to war over both ter-
ritories in the 1990s, causing many deaths and great economic disruption.
Though attempts at mediation were made, the political situation remained
unresolved.
Azhar
Baader-Meinhof Gang
Babel
Bacchanalia
Babylonian Exile or Babylonian Captivity Forced detention of
Bacall, Lauren orig. Betty Joan Perske (b. Sept. 6, 1924, New
Bacharach
bacteremia
Badoglio
Baganda See GANDA
bagasse
Bahia
Bailly
Bakhtin
Cardigan swept down the valley after the retreating Russian cavalry. The
battle ended with the loss of 40% of the Light Brigade and inspired the
1855 poem “Charge of the Light Brigade” by Alfred, Lord TENNYSON.
balalaika
baldachin
Balearic
LIBERTIES UNION (ACLU). As
Baldwin (of Bewdley), Stan-
ley Baldwin, 1st Earl (b. Aug.
ish anticipated gaining a mandate over Palestine after World War I (1914–
18) and hoped to win over Jewish public opinion to the side of the Allies.
They also hoped that pro-British settlers would help protect
approaches to the SUEZ CANAL, a vital link to Britain’s South Asian pos-
sessions.
LET RUSSE DE MONTE CARLO; BALLETS RUSSES; BOLSHOI BALLET; NEW YORK CITY BAL-
LET; ROYAL BALLET.
Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo
Ballymena
rated as constituent republics. In 1944 Soviet troops recovered the terri-
tory overrun by German forces in 1941. The Baltic states gained
independence on the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991.
Baltimore, David (b. March 7, 1938, New York, N.Y., U.S.) U.S.
virologist. He received his doctorate from the Rockefeller Institute. He
and Howard Temin (1934–94), working independently, discovered an
enzyme that synthesizes DNA from RNA, the reverse of the usual pro-
cess. This enzyme, reverse transcriptase, has become an invaluable tool
in recombinant DNA technology. The research of Baltimore, Temin, and
RENATO DULBECCO helped illuminate the role of viruses in cancer; the three
men shared a Nobel Prize in 1975. In 1990 Baltimore became president
of Rockefeller University; in 1997 he became president of the California
Institute of Technology.
Baltimore (of Baltimore), George Calvert, 1st Baron (b.
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad (B&O) First steam-operated rail-
way in the U.S. to be chartered as a common carrier of freight and pas-
sengers (1827). The B&O was established by Baltimore merchants to
foster trade with the West. By 1852 the railroad extended to Wheeling,
Va. (now W.V.), and in the next two decades it reached Chicago, Ill., and
St. Louis, Mo. The B&O’s long-distance passenger trains were discon-
tinued in 1971 after AMTRAK was established. Many of B&O’s operations
were assumed by the CSX Corp. in 1980.
Baltimore Sun Daily newspaper published in Baltimore, Md., U.S. It
was begun as a four-page penny tabloid in 1837 by Arunah Shepherdson
Abell, a journeyman printer from Rhode Island. Known through much of
its history for its coverage of national and international news, the paper
was run by Abell’s family until 1910, when control passed to a group of
Baltimore businessmen,
including H. Crawford Black. Members of
Black’s family were chairmen of the board until 1984. In 1986 the Sun
was acquired by the Times Mirror Company, which in turn was acquired
by the Tribune Company in 2000. Author H.L. MENCKEN was for years
prominently associated with the Sun.
Baluba See LUBA
Baluchistan See BALOCHISTAN
Balzac
the town of Banbridge, established in 1712; it is the district seat and the
main agricultural and population centre of the region.
Banco, Nanni di See NANNI DI BANCO
ING AND GATHERING SOCIETY; SOCIOCULTURAL EVOLUTION.
Banda, Hastings (Kamuzu)
Bandama
Bandinelli, Baccio (b. Nov. 12, 1493?, Florence—d. Feb. 7, 1560,
Florence) Italian sculptor and painter active in Florence. Though trained
as a goldsmith by his father, he soon became one of the principal sculp-
tors at the MEDICI court. He often failed to complete his commissions and
was accused of jealousy and incompetence by BENVENUTO CELLINI and GIOR-
GIO VASARI. He is remembered more for accounts of his unattractive char-
acter than for the quality of his work, although surviving works prove
him to have been a more distinguished sculptor than his contemporaries
allowed. His most famous sculpture is Hercules and Cacus (1534), in the
Piazza della Signoria.
Bandung
Bangor Town (pop., 1991: 52,437), seat of NORTH DOWN district, North-
ern Ireland. It lies on the southern shore of Belfast Lough, 12 mi (19 km)
northeast of BELFAST. St. Comgall founded a monastery at Bangor c. 555,
which became a celebrated seat of learning. The town was sacked by the
Danes in the 9th century; it was partially rebuilt by St. Malachy in the
12th century. It is now a seaside resort.
Bangui
Bann)#
severely repressed all opposition. His restrictions of union activities and
constitutional liberties led to opposition by labour, the clergy, peasants,
and students. A 1978 coup d’état overthrew him, but he was democrati-
cally elected in 1997. He resigned in 2001.
Bao Dai
Baraka
barbet
Episcopal church leaders as St. Stevens, an Episcopal college for men.
The name was changed to Bard College in 1934. Between 1928 and 1944
it served as COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY’s undergraduate school. It became coedu-
cational in 1944. Its undergraduate curriculum includes courses in the
social sciences, languages and literature, arts, and natural sciences and
mathematics.
Bardeen, John (b. May 23, 1908, Madison, Wis., U.S.—d. Jan. 30,
1991, Boston, Mass.) U.S. physicist. He earned a Ph.D. in mathematical
physics from Princeton University. He worked for the U.S. Naval Ord-
nance Laboratory during World War II, after which he worked for Bell
Telephone Laboratories. His work there led to his sharing a 1956 Nobel
Prize with WILLIAM B. SHOCKLEY and WALTER H. BRATTAIN for the invention of
the TRANSISTOR. In 1972 he again shared a Nobel Prize, this time with LEON
COOPER and J. Robert Schrieffer for developing the theory of SUPERCON-
DUCTIVITY (1957); this theory (called the BCS theory, for Bardeen-Cooper-
Schrieffer) is the basis for all later theoretical work in superconductivity.
Bardeen was also the author of a theory explaining certain properties of
SEMICONDUCTORS.
Bardesanes
from naturalistic and stylized representations of human and animal forms
to mythical beings, spirals, circles, and abstract motifs.
Barker, Harley Granville- See Harley GRANVILLE-BARKER
barking deer See MUNTJAC
Barkley, Alben W(illiam) (b. Nov. 24, 1877, Graves county, Ky.,
U.S.—d. April 30, 1956, Lexington, Va.) U.S. politician. After graduat-
ing from college, he studied law and was admitted to the Kentucky bar
in 1901. He was elected as a Democrat to the U.S. House of Represen-
tatives (1913–27) and the Senate (1927–49), where he served as majority
leader (1937–47). He was a prominent spokesman for the domestic and
international policies of Pres. FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT. He served as vice
president under Pres. HARR Y S. TRUMAN (1949–53). He later returned to the
Senate (1954–56).
Barkley, Charles (Wade) (b. Feb. 20, 1963, Leeds, Ala., U.S.) U.S.
basketball player. He spent his collegiate career as a forward at Auburn
University. He played for the Philadelphia 76ers (1984–91), the Phoenix
Suns (1992–95), and the Houston Rockets (1996–99). He is known for
his bruising play on the court and for his outspokenness off it.
Barlach
Barnard’s
RIGUERESQUE.
tal genres as OPERA, ORATORIO, CANTATA, SONATA, and CONCERTO were intro-
duced and such towering composers as CLAUDIO MONTEVERDI, J.S. BACH, and
Barotse See LOZI
Barquisimeto
Barth, John orig. John Simmons Barth, Jr. (b. May 27, 1930,
Cambridge, Md., U.S.) U.S. writer. Barth grew up on Maryland’s eastern
shore, the locale of much of his writing, and from 1953 he taught prin-
cipally at Johns Hopkins University. Apart from the experimental pieces
in Lost in the Funhouse (1968), his best-known works are the novels The
Floating Opera (1956), The End of the Road (1958), The Sot-Weed Fac-
tor (1960), Giles Goat-Boy (1966), and The Tidewater Tales (1987), most
of which play with and parody traditional narrative forms, combining
philosophical depth with biting satire and boisterous, often bawdy
humour. In 2001 he published the experimental novel Coming Soon!!!: A
Narrative, which was not well received.
Barth
he published the work for which he is best known, Familiar Quotations,
based largely on a notebook he kept for his customers. It was greatly
expanded in later editions; the 17th edition appeared in 2002. He also
wrote a complete concordance to Shakespeare’s dramatic works and
poems (1894), outstanding for the number and fullness of its citations.
Bartók
also ACID-BASE THEOR Y; ALKALI; NUCLEO-
PHILE.
Basel
The Narrow Road to the Deep North (1694), a poetic prose travelogue,
is one of the loveliest works of Japanese literature.
BASIC in full Beginner’s All-purpose Symbolic Instruction
Code Computer PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE developed by JOHN G. KEMENY and
Thomas E. Kurtz (b. 1928) at Dartmouth College in the mid 1960s. One
of the simplest high-level languages, with commands similar to English,
it can be learned with relative ease even by schoolchildren and novice
programmers. Since c. 1980, BASIC has been popular for use on PERSONAL
COMPUTERS.
Basic Input/Output System See BIOS
basic rocks See ACID AND BASIC ROCKS
basidiomycete
later it followed the variable fortunes of the Kingdom of NAPLES until united
with the Kingdom of Italy in 1861. The region suffered severe damage in a
disastrous earthquake in 1980. Agriculture is an economic mainstay.
Basilides
torical region, northern Spain. Bounded by the Bay of BISCAY, it consists
of the modern provinces of Vizcaya (Biscay), Álava, and Guipúzcoa and
has an area of 2,793 sq mi (7,234 sq km); its capital is VITORIA-GASTEIZ.
The Pyrenees Mountains separate it from the BASQUE COUNTR Y OF FRANCE.
The BASQUEs who inhabit the region have long sought autonomy. A sepa-
ratist movement succeeded in regaining Basque autonomy in 1936 under
the short-lived Republican government, but autonomy was withdrawn by
FRANCISCO FRANCO in 1937. Though limited autonomy was granted in 1979,
a campaign of terrorism against the Spanish government continued. Álava
is an agricultural region, while metallurgical industry is concentrated
around BILBAO.
Basque Country French Pays Basque
Bat Mitzvah See BAR MITZVAH
Bataan Death March
The coastline is fringed with islets, and several islands stretch from its
western tip. Discovered in 1819 by Sir William Parry, it was named for
Henry Bathurst, 3rd Earl Bathurst.
bathypelagic zone
vision news, which reports about important events in the world but at the
same time makes events important by reporting about them. In The Gulf
War Did Not Take Place (1991), he contended that the mass-media por-
trayal of the 1991 war in the Persian Gulf had made that event “unreal.”
See also POSTMODERNISM.
Baugh
Bayeux
182 I BBC (cid:2) bean
BBS See BULLETIN-BOARD SYSTEM
Beach, Amy Marcy orig. Amy Marcy Cheney known as Mrs.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Beagle
SALLY ANNE THOMPSON/EB INC.
Beagle
Channel
bearing wall or load-bearing wall Wall that carries the load of
Béarn
BROWN BEAR; SUN BEAR.
Beaton, Sir Cecil (Walter Hardy) (b. Jan. 14, 1904, London,
Beatrix
Beaumont
painted decorations for the Siena town hall (1529–35) and executed
designs for the marble pavement of Siena Cathedral. He is considered the
outstanding Sienese painter of the MANNERIST style.
Beccaria
Becknell
beehive tomb or tholos
BUMBLEBEE.
ARD STRAUSS and FREDERICK DELIUS.
Beerbohm, Sir (Henry) Max(imilian) (b. Aug. 24, 1872, London,
Beethoven
behaviour therapy or behaviour modification Application of
experimentally derived principles of LEARNING to the treatment of psycho-
logical disorders and the control of behaviour. The concept, which has its
roots in the work of EDWARD L. THORNDIKE, was popularized in the U.S. by
theorists of BEHAVIOURISM, including B.F. SKINNER. Behaviour-therapy tech-
niques are based on the principle of operant CONDITIONING, in which desired
behaviours are rewarded. There is little or no concern for conscious expe-
rience or unconscious processes. Such techniques have been applied with
some success to disturbances such as ENURESIS, TICs, PHOBIAs, STUTTERING,
Béjart
COMO PUCCINI.
Belau See PALAU
Belém
Belhadj
bell curve See NORMAL DISTRIBUTION
WILLIAM B. SHOCKLEY, for inventing the TRANSISTOR; and ARNO PENZIAS and
ROBERT W. WILSON, for discovering cosmic microwave background radia-
tion. It operates today in some 20 countries.
Bell palsy See PARALYSIS
bell ringing See CHANGE RINGING
Bella, Ahmed Ben See Ahmed BEN BELLA
Bellamy
Bell, Cool Papa orig. James Thomas Bell (b. May 17, 1903,
Bell Burnell, (Susan) Jocelyn orig. Susan Jocelyn Bell (b. July
15, 1943, Belfast, N.Ire.) British astronomer. As a research assistant at the
Bellerophon
Belmopan
See also MOHAMED BOUDIAF; HOUARI BOUMEDIENNE.
Ben-Gurion
benefice
professor of canon law, he was named a cardinal in 1375. When the WEST-
ERN SCHISM began in 1378, he supported the antipope Clement VII. Elected
pope at Avignon (see AVIGNON PAPACY), he refused French pressure to abdi-
cate and was besieged in the papal palace (1398). Benedict escaped to
Provence in 1403 and won back the obedience of France. He refused to
yield when deposed by the Councils of Pisa (1409) and Constance (1417).
Benedict XIV orig. Prospero Lambertini (b. March 31, 1675,
Benedict XV orig. Giacomo Della Chiesa (b. Nov. 21, 1854, Pegli,
Kingdom of Sardinia—d. Jan. 22,
1922, Rome, Italy) Pope (1914–22).
Ordained a priest in 1878, he entered
the papal diplomatic service. He was
made archbishop of Bologna in 1907
and cardinal in 1914. Elected pope a
month after the outbreak of World
War I, he tried to follow a policy of
strict neutrality and concentrated the
church’s efforts on relief. He later
made positive efforts toward reestab-
lishing peace, though his principal
attempt in 1917 to mediate the war
was unsuccessful.
Benedict XVI orig. Joseph
Alois Ratzinger (b. April 16,
Bengali
Benois
Bennett, Michael orig. Michael Bennett Difiglia (b. April 8,
1943, Buffalo, N.Y., U.S.—d. July 2, 1987, Tucson, Ariz.) U.S. dancer,
choreographer, and stage musical director. He began dancing at age three
and left high school to tour in a production of West Side Story. His major
contribution to dance was as choreographer-director of Broadway musi-
cals such as Promises, Promises (1968), Company (1970), Follies (1971),
and Dreamgirls (1981). His most remarkable musical was A Chorus Line
(1975, Pulitzer Prize), which he conceived, directed, and choreographed.
Bennett personally received eight Tony awards during his career.
Bennett (of Mickleham and of Calgary and Hopewell),
Richard Bedford Bennett, Viscount (b. July 3, 1870, Hopewell,
N.B., Can.—d. June 27, 1947, Mickleham, Surrey, Eng.) Canadian prime
minister (1930–35). Bennett was admitted to the bar in 1893 and prac-
ticed in New Brunswick. He then moved west and served in the legisla-
tures of the Northwest Territories and Alberta and in the Canadian House
of Commons (1911). He was named director general of national service
(1916) and later minister of justice (1921). He became head of the Con-
servative Party in 1927 and, promising relief from the Great Depression,
prime minister in 1930. But he underestimated the severity of the crisis,
and his measures were ineffective. He was defeated by the Liberals under
W.L. MACKENZIE KING. In 1939 he retired to England, where he was made
a viscount in 1941.
Bennett, Tony orig. Anthony (Dominick) Benedetto (b. Aug.
Benue-Congo
Bentinck, William (Henry Cavendish), Lord (b. Sept. 14, 1774,
HART BENTON.
Benton, Thomas Hart (b. April
Beowulf
Bergerac, Savinien Cyrano de See Savinien CYRANO DE BERGERAC
Bergey
Berkeley, Busby orig. William Berkeley Enos (b. Nov. 29, 1895,
Berkeley
Berlinguer
the story of a young priest’s war against sin. Dialogues of the Carmelites
(1949), a screenplay about 16 nuns martyred during the French Revolution,
was the basis for an opera by FRANCIS POULENC (1957).
Bernard
other contributions to Rome are his
Triton Fountain and Fountain of the
Four Rivers, noted for their architec-
tural composition and detail.
Bernoulli
Berry, Jean de France, duke de (b. Nov. 30, 1340, Vincennes,
France—d. June 15, 1416, Paris) French nobleman and patron of the arts.
He was the son of King JOHN II. As duke de Berry and Auvergne, he con-
trolled at least one-third of France during the middle period of the HUN-
DRED YEARS’ WAR. Berry shared in the administration of France and worked
for peace with England and within France, acting as diplomat and media-
tor. He invested fortunes in the art treasures that became his monument—
paintings, tapestries, jewelry, and illuminated manuscripts that included
the famous Très Riches Heures du duc de Berry.
Berry
Berzelius
German politician and chancellor (1909–17). A member of the civil ser-
vice, he was appointed Prussian minister of the interior in 1905 and
became German chancellor in 1909. Before World War I, he allowed the
militarist factions to dominate the government; in 1914 he supported a
“blank check” to Austria-Hungary for measures against Serbia. In 1916
he tried to secure the mediation of the U.S. to end the war, but he also
failed to restrict submarine warfare. In 1917 he angered conservatives by
promises of electoral reforms in Prussia and was forced to resign.
Bethune
Bezos
bhiksu
Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali (b. Jan. 5, 1928, near Larkana, Sindh, India—d.
April 4, 1979, Rawalpindi, Pak.) President (1971–73) and prime minister
(1973–77) of Pakistan. Son of a prominent politician, he was educated in
India, the U.S., and Britain. He served eight years in the government of
Mohammad Ayub Khan (1907–74) then resigned to form the Pakistan
People’s Party (1967). After the overthrow of the Ayub Khan regime and
the Pakistani civil war, Bhutto became president (1971). He nationalized
several key industries and taxed landed families. He became prime min-
ister in 1973, and his government, retaining martial law, began a process
of Islamization. Bhutto’s party won elections in 1977, but the opposition
accused him of electoral fraud. Gen. ZIA-UL-HAQ seized power and had
Bhutto imprisoned and later executed. BENAZIR BHUTTO is his daughter.
Biafra
Bibliothèque Nationale de France
Biedermeier
Bihar
big tree or giant sequoia or Sierra redwood Coniferous EVER-
GREEN (Sequoiadendron giganteum; see CONIFER) found in scattered groves
on the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada range of California, U.S. The
largest of all trees in bulk, the big tree is distinguished from the coastal
REDWOOD (Sequoia sempervirens) by having uniformly scalelike, or awl-
shaped, leaves that lie close against the branches, scaleless winter buds,
and cones requiring two seasons to mature. The pyramidal tree shape,
reddish brown furrowed bark, and drooping branches are common to both
genera. The largest specimen (in total bulk) is the General Sherman tree
in SEQUOIA NATIONAL PARK—101.5 ft (31 m) in circumference at its base,
272.4 ft (83 m) tall, and weighing an estimated 6,167 tons (5,593 metric
tons). Because big-tree lumber is more brittle than redwood lumber and
thus less desirable, the big tree has been easier to preserve; though some
groves have been cut, most of the 70 remaining groves are now protected
by state or national forests or parks.
Bigfoot or Sasquatch Large, hairy, humanlike creature that report-
edly lives in isolated areas of the northwestern U.S. and western Canada.
Descriptions of Bigfoot are similar to those of the ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN
of the Himalayas. It is said to be a primate 6–15 ft (2–4.5 m)in he ight,
walking upright and either moving silently or emitting a high-pitched cry.
Supposed footprints (some are hoaxes) have measured up to 24 in. (60
cm) in length. Despite many reported sightings, there is still no solid evi-
dence that Bigfoot exists.
bighorn or mountain sheep Stocky, climbing hoofed mammal
(Ovis canadensis) of western North
America. Both sexes have horns that
in the male may curve in a spiral
more than 39 in. (1 m) long. Their
fur is usually brown with a whitish
rump patch. The related thinhorn, or
Dall’s sheep (O. dalli), of Alaska and
Canada is similar to the bighorn.
Both species are about 39 in. (1 m)
tall at the shoulder, but the bighorn
is heavier, weighing up to 300 lb
(136 kg). They live in small groups
among remote crags and cliffs of
mountainous areas and feed mainly
on grasses. Bighorn rams compete
for females by launching themselves
at each other from a few yards’ dis-
tance and clashing horns.
Bighorn Mountains Mountain range, southern Montana and northern
Wyoming, U.S. It is a range of the northern ROCKY MOUNTAINS extending
120 mi (193 km), rising abruptly 4,000–5,000 ft (1,200–1,500 m) above
Billiton
Binet
but he was largely self-taught. He entered politics in Missouri and worked
as an itinerant portrait painter before turning to the lively routines of fron-
tier life for inspiration. Bingham is known for his incisive characteriza-
tions, clear, golden light, and talent
for organizing large, dense
compositions. His best-known works include Fur Traders Descending the
Missouri (1845) and Jolly Flatboatmen (1846).
bingo Game of chance played with cards having a grid of numbered
squares corresponding to numbered balls drawn at random. When a num-
ber on the card is drawn, the players cover that number (should they have
it); the game is won by covering a certain number of squares in a row (ver-
tically, horizontally, or diagonally). Cards are purchased and proceeds are
placed into a common “pot”; winning cards are awarded a portion of the
pot. Wildly popular in the mid 20th century, bingo has in recent decades
suffered a decline in America but has increased in popularity in other parts
of the world. The earliest name for bingo—lotto—was recorded in Britain
in 1776; the game is sometimes called keno in the U.S.
Binh Dinh Vuong See LE LOI
Bío-Bío
biological warfare or germ warfare Military use of disease-
TAXONOMY, EMBR YOLOGY, GENETICS, and ECOLOGY, each of which can be further
ZOOLOGY (animals), ORNITHOLOGY (birds), ENTOMOLOGY (insects), MYCOLOGY
(fungi), MICROBIOLOGY (microorganisms), and BACTERIOLOGY (bacteria). See
also BIOCHEMISTR Y; MOLECULAR BIOLOGY.
category. See also CREATIONISM; SOCIOBIOLOGY.
bioluminescence
Bioy Casares
Biringuccio
Bischof
Annexed by Germany in 1884, it was named for OTTO VON BISMARCK. Occu-
pied by Australia in 1914, it was made a mandated territory of Australia
in 1920. The group became part of the UN Trust Territory of New Guinea
after World War II and part of Papua New Guinea when it attained inde-
pendence in 1975.
bismuth
and by two sheets of tissue called the mantle. Bivalves have no head. They
feed on PHYTOPLANKTON by pumping water across the gills and trapping food
particles that are then moved to the mouth. Bivalves are found in most
parts of the ocean from the intertidal zone to abyssal depths.
revealing the red ground. The great
Attic painters (mid 6th century BC),
most notably EXEKIAS, developed nar-
rative scene decoration and perfected
the style. It continued to be popular
until the advent of RED-FIGURE POTTER Y
(c. 530 BC).
Black Forest German Schwarz-
228 I Black Muslims (cid:2) blackbird
Black Muslims See Nation of ISLAM
black nationalism U.S. political and social movement aimed at
developing economic power and community and ethnic pride among Afri-
can Americans. It was proclaimed by MARCUS GARVEY in the early 20th
century, when many U.S. black nationalists hoped for the eventual cre-
ation of a separate black nation in Africa. In the 1960s and ’70s, ELIJAH
MUHAMMAD and MALCOLM X preached the ideal of black nationalism as an
alternative to assimilation into the predominantly white culture of the U.S.
Black Panther Party (for Self-Defense) U.S. African American
PEPPER.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Blackberry (Rubus).
DEREK FELL
TRUM. See also ABSORPTION.
blackcap Common WARBLER (Sylvia atricapilla, family Sylviidae) from
Europe and North Africa to central
Asia. It is about 6 in. (14 cm) long
and has brownish upper parts, gray
underparts and face, and a black
(male) or reddish brown (female)
crown. Common in woodland bor-
ders and rough hedges, it has a rich
song.
Blackett
Blackwell’s Island See ROOSEVELT ISLAND
Blair, Tony orig. Anthony Charles Lynton (b. May 6, 1953, Edin-
burgh, Scot.) British politician who in 1997 became the country’s young-
est prime minister since 1812. Blair was a lawyer before winning election
to the House of COMMONS in 1983. Entering the shadow cabinet of the
LABOUR PARTY in 1988 at age 35, Blair urged the party to move to the politi-
cal centre and deemphasize its traditional advocacy of state control and
public ownership of certain sectors of the economy. He assumed leader-
ship of Labour in 1994 and revamped its platform. He led the party to
victories in the 1997, 2001, and 2005 elections. His government brokered
a peace agreement between unionists and republicans in Northern Ireland,
introduced devolved assemblies in Wales and Scotland, and carried out
reforms of Parliament. After the SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACKS on the U.S. in 2001,
Blair allied the United Kingdom with the U.S. and its president, GEORGE
W. BUSH, in a global war against terrorism. In late 2002 Blair and Bush
accused the Iraqi government of ÍADD0M hUSSEIN of continuing to possess
and develop biological, chemical, and nuclear weapons in violation of UN
mandates. Despite deep divisions within his own party and strong public
opposition to a war with Iraq, Blair, with Bush, led an attack on Iraq that
toppled hussein’s regime in March–April 2003.
Blais
Blakey, Art later Abdullah Ibn Buhaina (b. Oct. 11, 1919, Pitts-
Blalock
Blaue Reiter
blitzkrieg
MACULAR DEGENERATION; VISUAL-FIELD DEFECT.
Bliss, Sir Arthur (Edward Drummond) (b. Aug. 2, 1891, Lon-
Bliss, William D(wight) P(orter) (b. Aug. 20, 1856, Constantino-
supported the RUHR OCCUPATION (1923) to force Germany to pay reparations.
It gradually lost public support, and it was defeated in the 1924 elections.
Bloch
Blount
mals and trail persons. A large, strong dog, the bloodhound stands 23–27
in. (58–69 cm) and weighs 80–110 lb (35–50 kg). It has short hair and
long ears, with loose skin that falls into folds and wrinkles around the
head and neck. The coat is black-and-tan, red-brown and tan, or tawny.
Bloodless Revolution See GLORIOUS REVOLUTION
Bloomer, Amelia orig. Amelia Jenks (b. May 27, 1818, Homer,
blue-green algae See CYANOBAC-
TERIA
blue ground See KIMBERLITE
blue law U.S. statute regulating
work, commerce, and amusements on Sundays. The name is said to derive
from a list of Sabbath regulations published (on blue paper or in blue
wrappers) in New Haven, Conn., in 1781. Throughout colonial New
England such laws regulated morals and conduct. Most lapsed after the
American Revolution, but some, such as prohibitions against the Sunday
sale of alcoholic beverages, remain on the books in some areas.
Blue Mountains Plateau region, part of the GREAT DIVIDING RANGE,
southeastern AUSTRALIA. Located in NEW SOUTH WALES, the region rises to
about 3,600 ft (1,100 m). Once used as a retreat by wealthy SYDNEY resi-
dents, it is now accessible by good roads and is a popular tourist area; the
Blue Mountains area was designated a UNESCO WORLD HERITAGE SITE in
2000. The city of Blue Mountains (pop., 2004 est.: 77,011) was incorpo-
rated in 1947.
Blue Mountains Mountain range, eastern Jamaica. It extends from
north of KINGSTON eastward 30 mi (50 km) to the Caribbean Sea. Its high-
est point is Blue Mountain Peak, at 7,388 ft (2,252 m). It experiences
heavy rain and widely divergent temperatures. Blue Mountain coffee is
famous for its excellent quality.
Blue Nile See NILE RIVER
Blue Ridge or Blue Ridge Mountains Section of the APPALACHIAN
MOUNTAINS, eastern U.S. The range extends southward from Carlisle, Pa.,
through parts of Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina
to Mt. Oglethorpe in Georgia. The highest peaks are in the Black Moun-
tains of North Carolina; the average elevation is 2,000–4,000 ft (600–
1,200 m). The scenic Blue Ridge Parkway, established in 1936 and
administered by the National Park Service, runs 469 mi (755 km) along
the crest.
blue whale Mottled, blue-gray BALEEN WHALE (Balaenoptera musculus),
also called sulfur-bottom whale because of the yellowish DIATOMS on some
individuals. The largest of all animals, the blue whale reaches a maxi-
mum length of about 100 ft (30 m) and a maximum weight of 150 tons
(136,000 kg). It is found alone or in small groups in all oceans. In sum-
mer it feeds on KRILL in polar waters, and in winter it moves toward the
equator to breed. It was once the most important of the commercially
hunted baleen whales, and its populations were greatly reduced. Listed as
an ENDANGERED SPECIES, it is now protected.
Bluebeard or Gilles de Rais
wearing at the time. The word bluestocking came to be applied derisively
to a woman who affects literary or learned interests.
Bluford
the foundation for JAZZ, RHYTHM AND BLUES, and ROCK MUSIC.
often criticized for their stereotyped characters, simple writing style, and
didactic moralism, her books were widely translated and remained inter-
nationally popular long after her death.
BMW in full Bayerische Motoren Werke
Boccaccio
India). The tree growing on the site now is believed to be a descendant
of the original, planted from a cutting of a tree in Sri Lanka that had been
propagated from the original; both trees are sites of pilgrimage for Bud-
dhists. The bo tree or a representation of its leaf has often been used as
a symbol of the Buddha.
Bodhidharma
Bogarde
German GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE of the
15th century.
Bohemond
Boito
America’s poorest countries, Bolivia was
plagued by governmental instability for
much of the 20th century. Social and eco-
nomic tension continued in the early 21st
century, fueled by resistance to govern-
ment efforts to eradicate the growth of coca (from which the narcotic
cocaine is derived), by unrest among Bolivia’s Indians, and by disagree-
ments over how to exploit the country’s vast natural gas reserves.
dancers, including YEKATERINA GELTZER, VASILY TIKHOMIROV, GALINA ULANOVA,
Boltzmann
Bonaparte,
relations between the brothers. However, he offered Napoleon help dur-
ing the HUNDRED DAYS and was the last to defend Napoleon’s prerogatives
at the time of his second abdication, after which he lived in Italy.
(Marie-) Pauline (b. Oct. 20, 1780, Ajaccio,
Corsica—d. June 9, 1825, Florence) French noblewoman. A sister of
NAPOLEON, in 1797 she married one of his staff officers, Gen. C.V.E.
Leclerc (1772–1802). After Leclerc’s death, she married Prince Camillo
F.L. Borghese (1803) and went with him to Rome. She soon tired of him
and returned to Paris, where her behaviour caused some scandal. In 1806
she received the title of duchess of Guastalla. She died of cancer in Flo-
rence.
Bonaventure
CALCIUM DEFICIENCY). The process also causes underutilized bone, as in an
immobilized limb, to atrophy. Bone disorders include RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS,
OSTEOARTHRITIS, RICKETS, OSTEOPOROSIS, and TUMOURs. Bone can fracture sud-
denly or over time, as in stress fractures.
Bône See ANNABA
bone china Hard-paste PORCELAIN containing bone ash. It was developed
by Josiah Spode (1754–1827)
England c. 1800. The addition of
bone ash to china stone and china
clay (i.e., hard china) made bone
china easier to manufacture;
stronger, does not chip easily, and
has an ivory-white colour that lends
itself to decoration. Other factories
(Minton, Derby, Worcester, WEDG-
WOOD, Rockingham) adopted the for-
mula in the early 19th century. Bone
china remains popular for tableware
in Britain and the U.S. See also
STONEWARE.
bone marrow or myeloid tis-
Bonheur
Bonnard
LINDISFARNE GOSPELS.
Booker Prize in full (2002– ) Man Booker Prize Prestigious Brit-
ish award given annually to a full-length novel. It was established in 1968
by the multinational company Booker McConnell as a counterpart to the
French Prix Goncourt. The Booker Prize Foundation administers the prize,
aided by an advisory committee. Entries, which are nominated by publish-
ers, must be written by an English-language author from the United King-
dom, the Commonwealth countries, Ireland, or South Africa. Its winners
have included KINGSLEY AMIS, A.S. BYATT, RUTH PRAWER JHABVALA, and SALMAN
RUSHDIE. In 1992 a Booker Russian Novel Prize was introduced.
book (cid:2) Boolean algebra
Jane Patterson’s bookplate designed by
Robert Anning Bell, English, 1890s
COURTESY OF THE VICTORIA AND ALBERT MUSEUM,
LONDON
Boolean algebra Symbolic sys-
tem used for designing logic circuits
and networks for DIGITAL COMPUTERS. Its
chief utility is in representing the
truth value of statements, rather than
the numeric quantities handled by
ordinary algebra. It lends itself to use
in the binary system employed by
digital computers, since the only pos-
sible truth values, true and false, can
be represented by the binary digits 1
and 0. A circuit in computer memory
can be open or closed, depending on
the value assigned to it, and it is the
integrated work of such circuits that
George Boole, engraving.
COURTESY OF THE TRUSTEES OF THE BRITISH MUSEUM;
PHOTOGRAPH, J.R. FREEMAN & CO. LTD.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Boone, Daniel
Bophuthatswana
Booth, Edwin (Thomas)
WILKES BOOTH
HELIOTROPES, and lungworts (Pulmo-
naria). Borage is also used as an
herbal and bee plant and eaten as a
vegetable.
Borah, William E(dgar)
borax or tincal
Beings (1967) almost erase the distinctions between prose and poetry.
Though he later repudiated it, he is credited with establishing in South
America the modernist Ultraist movement, a rebellion against the deca-
dence of the established writers of the Generation of ’98.
Borghese family
Borobudur
Bosanquet
boson
botanical garden or botanic garden Originally, a collection of
living plants designed to illustrate relationships within plant groups. Most
modern botanical gardens are concerned primarily with exhibiting orna-
mental plants in a scheme that emphasizes natural relationships. A display
garden of mostly woody plants (shrubs and trees) is often called an ARBO-
RETUM. The botanical garden as an institution can be traced to ancient China
and many Mediterranean countries, where such gardens were often cen-
ters for raising plants used for food and medicines. Botanical gardens are
also reservoirs of valuable heritable characteristics, potentially important
in the breeding of new varieties of plants. Still another function is the
training of gardeners. The world’s most famous botanical garden is KEW
GARDENS.
fossil POLLEN and SPORES). See also FORESTR Y, HORTICULTURE.
Botha
the South African boundary in the southeast. The economy traditionally
depends on livestock raising; the development of diamond mining has
increased the country’s wealth. Botswana is a republic with one legisla-
tive body; its head of state and government is the president. The region’s
earliest inhabitants were the Khoekhoe and San. Sites were settled as early
as AD 190 during the southerly migration of Bantu-speaking farmers.
Tswana dynasties, which developed in the western TRANSVAAL in the 13th–
14th centuries, moved into Botswana in the 18th century and established
several powerful states. European missionaries arrived in the early 19th
century, but it was the discovery of gold in 1867 that excited European
interest. In 1885 the area became the British Bechuanaland Protectorate,
remaining so until the 1960s. In 1966 the Republic of Bechuanaland was
proclaimed as an independent member of the British COMMONWEALTH, and
later that year its name was changed to Botswana. Independent Botswana
tried to maintain a delicate balance between its economic dependence on
South Africa and its relations with the surrounding black countries; the
independence of Namibia in 1990 and South Africa’s rejection of apart-
heid eased tensions.
Botticelli
Camulodunum (Colchester), Verulamium (St. Albans), and part of Lond-
inium (London) and military posts; according to TACITUS, her forces massa-
cred up to 70,000 Romans and pro-Roman Britons and destroyed the
Roman 9th Legion. She is thought to have taken poison or died of shock
when the Roman governor rallied his troops and destroyed her huge army.
Boudin
boulevards originally followed the city walls (the word originally meant
“bulwark”) and were built in the ancient Middle East, especially at Anti-
och. In Paris, straight and geometrically precise boulevards were incor-
porated into design principles taught at the École des BEAUX-ARTS, and they
form a prominent feature of the city. Similar boulevards are found in other
cities such as Washington, D.C. Formal curving boulevards are a feature
of such cities as Vienna and Prague.
Boulez
Bourgeois
Bow porcelain
bowls or lawn bowls or lawn bowling Bowling game similar to
the Italian BOCCIE and the French BOULES played on a green with wooden
balls (called bowls) that are rolled at a target ball (the jack). The object
is to roll one’s bowls so that they come to rest nearer to the jack than
those of an opponent, sometimes achieved by knocking aside an oppo-
nent’s bowl or jack. One point is awarded for each winning bowl. Depend-
ing on the game, players use four, three, or two bowls, and games end at
18 or 21 points.
Bowman
Boyer
Bradley, Bill in full William Warren Bradley (b. July 28, 1943,
the SEMINOLE WARS and the MEXICAN
the BATTLE OF
WAR. When North Carolina seceded,
he joined the Confederate army and
fought in the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR. He
was promoted to general in 1862 at
the BATTLE OF SHILOH. As commander
of the Army of Tennessee, he led his
troops to victory at
CHICKAMAUGA. His forces besieged
the Union troops at Chattanooga but
were eventually routed. He was
relieved
command
appointed military adviser to Con-
federate Pres. JEFFERSON DAVIS.
Bragg law Relation between the
spacing of atomic planes in crystals
and the angles of incidence at which
the planes produce the most intense
LIAM BRAGG.
Brahe
brahma-loka
also exist for other languages, for mathematical and technical material,
and for musical notation. Braille may be handwritten—from right to left—
using a stylus to press dots into a piece of paper between hinged metal
plates; when the sheet is turned over, the dots face up and are read from
left to right. Braille typewriters and electric embossing machines are also
used.
Braille
friction and circulation of the liquid (usually water) from a series of pock-
ets in the rotor to a series of complementary pockets in the stator. See also
AIR BRAKE.
Bramante
Indians
in Connecticut. He
fought for the British in the last
FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR (1754–63).
He led four of
the six IROQUOIS
nations on the British side in the
AMERICAN REVOLUTION, winning several
notable battles. After the war Brant
was granted land along the Grand
River in Ontario, Can., where he
ruled peacefully and continued his
missionary work.
Brant, Sebastian (b. 1458?,
Strassburg—d. May
1521,
Strassburg) German poet. He taught
law and later was appointed imperial
councillor and court palatine by
MAXIMILIAN I. His varied writings
include works on law, religion, poli-
tics, and especially morals. His best-
known work is The Ship of Fools
(1494), an allegory telling of fools
on a ship bound for a “fool’s para-
dise.” The most famous German literary work of the 15th century, it ridi-
cules the vices of the age and gave rise to a whole school of fool’s
literature.
Braque
Brandt, Bill orig. Hermann Wilhelm Brandt (b. May 1904, Ham-
Brandt, Willy orig. Herbert Ernst Karl Frahm (b. Dec. 18, 1913,
ECONOMIC COMMUNITY. For
naval and admiralty brasses, in which a small amount of tin improves
resistance to corrosion by seawater; and aluminum brasses, which pro-
vide strength and corrosion resistance where the naval brasses may fail.
brass instrument Musical wind instrument, usually made of brass or
other metal, in which the vibration of the player’s lips against a cup- or
funnel-shaped mouthpiece causes the initial vibration of an air column.
The TRUMPET, TROMBONE, FRENCH HORN, TUBA, EUPHONIUM, SOUSAPHONE, CORNET,
FLÜGELHORN, and BUGLE, as well as historical instruments such as the ophi-
cleide, cornett, and serpent, are considered brass instruments (though the
last two were made of wood); the saxophones, though made of brass, are
Brassaï
Brazos
Brébeuf
Bremen
dialects; this disunity has hindered efforts to form orthographic and lit-
erary standards. Though Breton may have half a million speakers, use of
the language is generally thought to be in sharp decline among younger
people despite a resurgence of regional particularism in western Europe.
BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT (WORLD BANK) and the INTERNA-
TIONAL MONETAR Y FUND. See also JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES.
bretwalda
274 I bridewealth (cid:2) Bridget
bridewealth Payment made by the groom or his kin to the kin of the
wife in order to ratify the marriage. The practice is common in most parts
of the globe in one form or another, but it is perhaps most prevalent in
Africa. It is most often a matter of social and symbolic as well as eco-
nomic reciprocity, being part of a long series of exchanges between the
two intermarrying families. It represents a pledge that the wife will be
well treated and serves as compensation for her family’s loss. Payment
may consist of goods or, less frequently, services, and it may be paid in
one sum or regularly over a long period of time. See also DOWR Y.
bridge Structure that spans horizontally to allow pedestrians and
vehicles to cross a void. Bridge construction has always presented civil
engineering with its greatest challenges. The simplest bridge is the beam
(or girder) bridge, consisting of straight, rigid beams of steel or concrete
placed across a span. Ancient Roman bridges are famous for their rounded
arch form, which permitted spans much longer than those of stone beams
and were more durable than wood. A modern version of the arch bridge
might have a trussed arch anchored to the abutments and a deck hanging
from the arch by vertical cables. Suspension bridges (e.g., BROOKLYN BRIDGE,
GOLDEN GATE BRIDGE) are capable of spanning great distances; their main
support members are cables composed of thousands of strands of wire
supported by two towers and anchored at each end, and the deck is sus-
pended by vertical cables hung from the main cables. In cable-stayed
bridges, cables fan out and down from a central tower to various points
on the deck; variations of this design have resulted in bridges of striking
design and very long span. Other bridges include the truss bridge, popu-
lar (e.g., for railroad bridges) because it uses a relatively small amount
of material to carry large loads, and the cantilever bridge, typically made
with three spans, with the outer spans anchored down at the shore and the
central span resting on the cantilevered arms.
Bridges, Harry orig. Alfred Bryant Renton (b. July 28, 1901,
Bridges, Robert
(Seymour)
(b. Oct. 23, 1844, Walmer, Kent,
Eng.—d. April 21, 1930, Boar’s Hill,
Oxford) English poet. He published
several long poems and poetic dra-
mas, but his reputation rests on the
lyrics collected in Shorter Poems
(1890, 1894), which reveal his mas-
tery of prosody. His 1916 edition of
the poetry of his friend GERARD MAN-
LEY HOPKINS rescued it from obscurity.
He was poet
laureate of England
from 1913 until his death.
c. 1303,
Swed.—d. July 23, 1373, Rome;
canonized Oct. 8, 1391; feast day
July 23) Mystic and patron saint of
Sweden. She had religious visions
from an early age but married and
had eight children,
including St.
Catherine of Sweden. On the death
of her husband (1344), she retired to
Bridget, Saint
Robert Bridges, gold-point drawing by
W. Strang; in the National Portrait
Gallery, London
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY,
LONDON
Three common types of bridge design.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
brigade
276 I Bristol (cid:2) British Library
British Airways in full British Airways PLC International passen-
ger airline based in London. In 1936 British Airways Ltd. was founded
through the merger of three smaller airlines. A merger with Imperial Air-
ways in 1939 created British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC). The
British Airways name returned in 1974 with the government-mandated
merger of BOAC and British European Airways (BEA). The airline was
privatized in 1987. It merged with British Caledonian later that year. Brit-
ish Airways is one of Europe’s largest air carriers.
British American Tobacco PLC formerly British-American
Tobacco Company Ltd. (1902–76) and B.A.T Industries PLC
(1976–98) British conglomerate that is one of the world’s largest manu-
facturers of tobacco products. The company’s international headquarters
are in London, while its chief American subsidiary, Brown & Williamson
Tobacco Corporation, is headquartered in Louisville, Ky. Its acquisitions
have included the American Tobacco Company (1994), which represents
such cigarette brands as Pall Mall and Lucky Strike; Rothmans Interna-
tional (1999), known for its Dunhill and Rothmans brands; and Canada’s
largest cigarette company, Imperial Tobacco (2000).
British Broadcasting Corp. See BBC
province (founded 1908). It comprises faculties of agricultural sciences,
applied science, arts, commerce and business administration, dentistry,
education, forestry, graduate studies, law, medicine, pharmacy, theology,
and science. Plant research is conducted at the UBC Botanical Garden,
which is open to the public. The university has extensive study-abroad
and continuing-education programs.
British Commonwealth See COMMONWEALTH
British Expeditionary Force (BEF) Home-based regular British
army forces sent to northern France at the start of World Wars I and II to
support the French armies. Britain wished to help France in case of a Ger-
man attack, and the BEF was created in 1908 to ensure that British forces
would be trained and ready to respond quickly. It consisted of six INFAN-
TR Y divisions and one CAVALR Y division. Five divisions sent to France at the
outbreak of World War I sustained heavy losses and were succeeded by
vast British armies. Divisions sent to France early in World War II (1939)
returned to England when France fell the next year.
British Guiana See GUYANA
British Honduras See BELIZE
British Invasion Musical movement. In the mid 1960s the popularity
of a number of British rock-and-roll (“beat”) groups spread rapidly to the
U.S., beginning with the triumphant arrival of Liverpool’s BEATLES in New
York in 1964 and continuing with the ROLLING STONES, the Animals, and
others. Building on 1950s U.S. models, these groups incorporated such
local musical traditions as skiffle (acoustic drummerless ensembles),
dancehall, and Celtic folk.
British Library National library of Great Britain, formed by the Brit-
ish Library Act (1972) and organized July 1, 1973. It consists of the former
BRITISH MUSEUM library, the National Central Library, the National Lending
Library for Science and Technology, and the British National Bibliogra-
phy. The British Museum library, founded in 1753 based on earlier col-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
British Virgin Islands See British VIRGIN ISLANDS
Brittany French Bretagne
SATIN or TWILL weave (see WEAVING).
The background may be twill, satin,
or plain weave. The rich,
fairly
heavy fabric is frequently used for
evening
dresses,
draperies,
upholstery.
broccoli Plant (Brassica oleracea,
Botrytis group) closely related to
CABBAGE in the MUSTARD FAMILY. A fast-
Broch
Bronzino
Brontosaurus See APATOSAURUS
Bronx Zoo formally New York Zoological Park ZOO in New
Brooks, Romaine Goddard orig. Beatrice Romaine God-
Brouwer
Brooks Islands See MIDWAY
Brooks Range Mountain range, northern Alaska, U.S. It extends about
600 mi (1,000 km) from Kotzebue Sound to the Canadian border. Its
highest peak is Mount Isto, at 9,060 ft (2,760 m). Forming the northwest-
ern end of the ROCKY MOUNTAINS, it lies within GATES OF THE ARCTIC NATIONAL
PARK. Huge reserves of oil were discovered at PRUDHOE BAY, and the range
is crossed at Atigun Pass by the TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE.
Brooks, Gwendolyn (Elizabeth) (b. June 7, 1917, Topeka, Kan.,
World War I. In 1921 he joined the U.S. Communist Party; he served as
the party’s general secretary from 1930 to 1944 and was its presidential
candidate in 1936 and 1940. In 1944 he was removed from his position
for declaring that capitalism and socialism could coexist, and in 1946 he
was expelled from the party.
Brown, Capability orig. Lancelot Brown (b. 1715, Kirkharle,
Brown, Jim orig. James Nathaniel Brown (b. Feb. 17, 1936, St.
Simons, Ga., U.S.) U.S. football player, often considered the greatest run-
ning back of all time. He was an All-American in football and lacrosse
at Syracuse University. In his nine seasons with the Cleveland Browns
(1957–65), he set NFL overall rushing and combined yardage records that
Brown, C. (cid:2) Brown, W.
the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
282 I brown bear (cid:2) browser
TREAT DAVIDSON—THE NATIONAL AUDUBON SOCIETY
COLLECTION/PHOTO RESEARCHERS
Brown trout (Salmo trutta)
Brown v. Board of Education (of Topeka) (1954) U.S. Supreme
Court case in which the court ruled unanimously that RACIAL SEGREGATION
in public schools violated the 14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
The amendment says that no state may deny equal protection of the laws
to any person within its jurisdiction. The court declared separate educa-
tional facilities to be inherently unequal, thus reversing its 1896 ruling in
PLESSY V. FERGUSON. The Brown ruling was limited to public schools, but it
was believed to imply that segregation is not permissible in other public
facilities. Guidelines for ending segregation were presented and school
boards were advised to proceed “with all deliberate speed.” See also THUR-
GOOD MARSHALL.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Browning, Robert (b. May 7,
Elizabeth Barrett Browning, detail of an
oil painting by Michele Gordigiani,
1858; in the National Portrait Gallery,
London.
Browning, Elizabeth Barrett orig. Elizabeth Barrett (b. March
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY,
LONDON
Browning, Tod orig. Charles Albert Browning (b. July 12, 1880,
Brownshirts See SA
standard style rules. Netscape Navigator became the dominant Web
browser soon after its release in 1994; Microsoft’s Internet Explorer was
introduced a year later and has become widespread.
Brubeck, Dave orig. David Warren Brubeck (b. Dec. 6, 1920,
Bruce, Lenny orig. Leonard Alfred Schneider (b. Oct. 13, 1925,
Mineola, N.Y., U.S.—d. Aug. 3, 1966, Hollywood, Calif.) U.S. stand-up
comedian. He studied acting and began performing stand-up routines in
nightclubs in the 1950s, soon developing a style marked by black humour
and punctuated with obscenity. As he gained notoriety, he focused his
material on criticisms of the social and legal establishments, organized
religion, and other controversial subjects. His reputation acquired iconic
status as a daring performer and an activist for free speech after his death
from a drug overdose.
brucellosis
dancer. From 1937 he studied at the
Royal Danish Ballet training school,
and in 1947 he joined the company.
He performed as guest soloist with
many other companies,
including
American Ballet Theatre in the
1950s and ’60s, dancing leading
roles in such ballets as La Sylphide,
Swan Lake, and Carmen. He was
admired for his classical technique.
He later served as director of the
Royal Swedish Opera House (1967–
72) and assistant director (1973–81)
and director (1983–86) of Canada’s
National Ballet.
bruise or contusion Visible blu-
ish or purplish mark beneath the sur-
face of unbroken skin,
indicating
burst blood vessels in deeper tissue
layers. Bruises are usually caused by
a blow or pressure, but they may occur spontaneously in elderly persons.
The yellowish hue that becomes visible as a bruise heals comes from the
disintegration and gradual absorption of blood.
Brumaire
Brunelleschi
world law by espousing arbitration to prevent war. A believer in a literal
interpretation of the Bible, he was a prosecuting attorney in the SCOPES TRIAL
(1925), in which he debated CLARENCE DARROW on the issue of evolution;
the trial took a heavy toll on his health, and he died soon after it ended.
Bryant, Bear orig. Paul William Bryant (b. Sept. 11, 1913,
WALDO EMERSON and HENR Y DAVID THO-
REAU. Admitted to the bar at age 21,
he spent nearly 10 years as an attor-
ney, a profession he hated. His
Poems
(1821),
including “To a
Waterfowl,” secured his reputation.
In 1825 he moved to New York City,
where for almost 50 years (1829–78)
he was editor in chief of the Evening
Post, which he transformed into an
organ of progressive thought.
Bryce Canyon National Park
Park, southern Utah, U.S. It is not a
true canyon but rather a series of
natural amphitheatres below which
stands an array of limestone and
sandstone columns. Its geology is related to that of GRAND CANYON and
ZION national parks, since the stone of all three was formed while the entire
region was under a shallow sea. The park, established in 1928, covers
35,835 acres (14,513 hectares).
Bryn Mawr
gian rebellion in 1830 and then the capital of Belgium. An important
industrial and commercial city, it is the headquarters of both NATO and
the EUROPEAN UNION.
Brutus, Marcus Junius or Quintus Caepio Brutus (b. 85—d.
Bruyère, Jean de La See Jean
de LA BRUYERE
Bryan, William Jennings (b.
March
1860,
Salem,
Ill.,
U.S.—d. July 26, 1925, Dayton,
Tenn.) U.S. politician and orator. He
practiced law at Jacksonville, Ill.
(1883–87), before moving to Lin-
coln, Neb., where he was elected to
the U.S. Congress in 1890. In the
U.S. House
of Representatives
(1891–95), he became the national
leader of the FREE SILVER MOVEMENT; he
advocated its aims in his “Cross of
Gold” speech, which won him the
DEMOCRATIC PARTY nomination for
president in 1896. He was the party’s
nominee again in 1900 and 1908. In
1901 he founded a newspaper, The
Commoner, and thereafter lectured
widely to admiring audiences; he
was called “the Great Commoner.”
He helped secure the presidential
nomination for WOODROW WILSON in
1912 and served as his secretary of
state
(1913–15),
contributing to
and gelatinous to hard with calcium-containing skeletons. Freshwater bry-
ozoans attach primarily to leaves, stems, and tree roots in shallow water.
Marine bryozoans have a wide range of habitats, from coastal areas to
great ocean depths, but are most common just below the tidemarks. Bry-
ozoans feed by capturing plankton with their tentacles.
brytenwalda See BRETWALDA
BSE See MAD COW DISEASE
Buber
Buchwald
buddleia
of MASS ACTION.
Buffon
electrical wiring, HVAC (HEATING, VENTILATING, and AIR-CONDITIONING), WIN-
DOWS, FLOOR COVERINGS, plasterwork, MOLDINGS, ceramic TILE, cabinets, and
other features. See also ARCHITECTURE.
building stone See building STONE
Bujumbura
counterthrust in the wooded Ardennes region of southern Belgium. The
German drive, led by GERD VON RUNDSTEDT’s PANZER army, was initially suc-
cessful but was halted by Allied resistance and reinforcements led by
GEORGE PATTON. The Germans withdrew in January 1945, but both sides
suffered heavy losses.
Buli style
bulletin-board system (BBS) Computerized system used to
Bülow
MOROCCAN CRISES.
Bülow
Bunin
Burbidge, (Eleanor) Marga-
ret orig. Eleanor Margaret
SYNTHESIS).
burbot
Wind (1910), introduced the animal characters that were to populate his
subsequent stories, which were published in many languages. He pro-
moted conservationism through his “Wildlife Protection Program,” his
“Radio Nature League,” and other organizations. He wrote more than 170
books and 15,000 stories for newspaper columns.
Burgess
Burne-Jones
LESQUE SHOW).
burlesque show Stage entertainment composed of slapstick sketches,
bawdy humour, chorus numbers, and solo dances. Introduced in the U.S.
in 1868 by a company of English chorus girls, it developed as a version
of the MINSTREL SHOW, divided into three parts: (1) a series of coarse humor-
ous songs, slapstick sketches, and comic monologues; (2) the olio, or
mixture of variety acts (e.g., acrobats, magicians, singers); and (3) cho-
rus numbers and occasionally a takeoff, or burlesque, on politics or a cur-
rent play. The show ended with an exotic dancer or a boxing match. In
the early 20th century, many performers, including FANNY BRICE, AL JOL-
SON, and W.C. FIELDS, began their careers in burlesque. The addition of the
striptease in the 1920s made a star of GYPSY ROSE LEE, but censorship and
competition from motion pictures soon led to burlesque’s decline.
Burlingame, Anson (b. Nov. 14, 1820, New Berlin, N.Y., U.S.—d.
Feb. 23, 1870, St. Petersburg, Russia) U.S. diplomat. He served in the
U.S. House of Representatives (1855–61) and helped found the REPUBLICAN
PARTY. As U.S. minister to China (1861–67), he implemented a policy of
cooperation between China and the Western powers. He so impressed the
Burnet
Burschenschaft
bus (cid:2) Bush
George W. Bush.
the ELECTORAL COLLEGE (271–266). In
ERIC DRAPER/WHITE HOUSE PHOTO
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
bushid§
ogy, presented a refutation of hedonism and of the notion that self-interest
is the ultimate principle of good conduct.
Butler, Nicholas M(urray) (b. April 2, 1862, Elizabeth, N.J.,
U.S.—d. Dec. 7, 1947, New York, N.Y.) U.S. educator. He received his
Ph.D. from Columbia University. He was the founding president of what
is today Columbia’s Teachers College (1886–91). As president of Colum-
bia University itself (1901–45), he led the institution to world renown.
Early in his career he criticized prevailing pedagogical methods, but later
he turned on pedagogical reform itself, decrying vocationalism in educa-
tion and behaviorism in psychology. A champion of international under-
standing, he helped establish the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace in 1910 and served as its president (1925–45). In 1931 he shared
the Nobel Peace Prize with JANE ADDAMS.
Butler, R(ichard) A(usten), baron of Saffron Walden (b. Dec.
buttress Exterior support, usually of masonry, projecting from the face
of a wall and serving to strengthen it or resist outward thrust from an arch
or roof. Buttresses also have a decorative function. Though used since
ancient times (Mesopotamian temples featured decorative buttresses, as
did Roman and Byzantine structures), they are especially associated with
GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE. See also FLYING BUTTRESS.
Butung See BUTON
Buwayhid dynasty See BãYID DYNASTY
Buxtehude
byssinosis
C High-level procedural computer PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE with many low-
level features, including the ability to handle memory addresses and bits.
It is highly portable among platforms and therefore widely used in indus-
try and among computer professionals. C was developed by Dennis M.
Ritchie (born 1941) of Bell Laboratories in 1972. The OPERATING SYSTEM
UNIX was written almost exclusively in C, and C has been standardized
as part of POSIX (Portable Operating System Interface for UNIX).
VISION.
Cabral
Cacus and Caca
tury. The English took it in 1346 and 1417 and held it until 1450. It suf-
fered in the Wars of RELIGION and fell to the Protestants in 1562. During
the FRENCH REVOLUTION it was a centre for the GIRONDIN movement. The city
was severely damaged in the Allied NORMANDY CAMPAIGN (1944), but it
was rebuilt. Notable structures include the 11th-century abbey and the
university. Caen is a transportation centre and manufactures automobiles
and electrical equipment.
Caere
Caillaux
only some 85,000 people reported themselves to be Acadian/Cajun, the
census form also included a French Canadian category, which may have
confused the issue. Experts suggest that there are some 100,000 Cajuns
in Texas and from 500,000 to 700,000 Cajuns in Louisiana. In recent
decades Cajun cuisine, noted for its use of spicy seasonings, and ZYDECO
music have become popular among non-Cajuns.
cakravartin See CHAKRAVARTIN
Calabar
DEVICES ushered in calculators that could perform mathematical functions
in addition to basic arithmetic, and also store data and instructions in
memory registers, providing programming capabilities similar to those of
small computers.
calculus Field of mathematics that analyzes aspects of change in pro-
cesses or systems that can be modeled by FUNCTIONs. Through its two pri-
mary tools—the DERIVATIVE and the INTEGRAL—it allows precise calculation
of rates of change and of the total amount of change in such a system.
The derivative and the integral grew out of the idea of a LIMIT, the logical
extension of the concept of a function over smaller and smaller intervals.
The relationship between DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS and INTEGRAL CALCULUS, known
Calcutta See KOLKATA
Caldecott
calendula
Californian Indian Any member
INDIAN; POMO; YUMAn.
Caligula
Callas
calumet
Cambodian See KHMER
Cambodian language See KHMER LANGUAGE
Cambon
Cambridge Agreement Pledge made in Cambridge, England, in
1629 by Puritan stockholders of the Massachusetts Bay Co. to emigrate
to New England if the colony’s government could be transferred there.
The company agreed and shifted control of the corporation to the signers
of the agreement. JOHN WINTHROP was elected governor, and he set sail in
1630 with a large group of Puritan followers to settle in the Boston area
(see MASSACHUSETTS BAY COLONY).
Cambridge Platonists
of mountains that form a natural boundary between Cameroon and Nige-
ria. RICHARD BURTON climbed its summit in 1861. The volcano last erupted
in 2000.
Camilla In ROMAN MYTHOLOGY, a legendary warrior maiden and favourite
of DIANA. According to VIRGIL, her father dedicated her to Diana and trained
her as a hunter and warrior, and she led a band of warriors that included
women. She fought against AENEAS and was killed as she chased a retreat-
ing soldier.
Camillus
Neapolis (Naples). After the fall of Rome, Campania was ruled by Gaul,
Byzantium, and the Normans; it became part of the Kingdom of Naples
in 1282. It was united with Italy in 1861. Its economy is bolstered by
agriculture, the industrial area around Naples, and tourism.
campanile
Campion, Jane (b. April 30,
Campo Formio
the BRITISH NORTH AMERICA ACT of 1867.
Canadian Alliance French Alliance Canadienne Former con-
Canadian Broadcasting Corp. (CBC) Canadian public broadcast-
ing service, created in 1936 to promote Canadian culture and serve as an
instrument of national unity. It offers French- and English-language pro-
grams over AM and FM radio networks, television networks, cable tele-
vision channels, and shortwave radio. Noted for its news and public affairs
programs, the CBC also presents documentaries, dramas, classical music,
entertainment, and educational programs as well as sports programs.
Canadian Football League (CFL) Major Canadian professional
gridiron FOOTBALL organization, formed in 1958. The league’s Western Con-
ference includes teams from Edmonton, Calgary, British Columbia,
Saskatchewan, and Winnipeg; its Eastern Conference comprises teams
from Hamilton, Montreal, Ottawa, and Toronto. The conference winners
compete for the Grey Cup. The CFL plays a gridiron style of football.
Canadian Labour Congress (CLC) Nationwide association of
labour unions in Canada. The CLC was formed in 1956 by the merger of
the Canadian counterparts to the American Federation of Labor and the
Congress of Industrial Organizations, which merged in the same year (see
AFL-CIO). It represents roughly 3 million unionized workers across
Canada.
Canadian National Railway Co. Corporation created by the
Canadian government in 1918 to operate a number of nationalized rail-
roads (including the old Grand Trunk lines, Intercolonial Railway,
National Transcontinental Railway, and Canadian Northern Railway) as
one of Canada’s two transcontinental railroad systems. Its passenger ser-
vices were taken over by VIA Rail Canada in 1978, and the company was
privatized in 1995. The Canadian National Railway stretches across
Canada from Nova Scotia to Vancouver. It bought the Illinois Central
Corp. in 1999, thus acquiring a railroad network that links Canada to the
Gulf of Mexico.
Canadian Pacific Railway Ltd. (CPR) Privately owned company
Canaletto
Canaris
ceptibility. Triggers include hormones, viruses, smoking, diet, and radia-
tion. Cancer can begin in almost any tissue, including blood (see LEUKEMIA)
and lymph (see LYMPHOMA). When it metastasizes, it remains a cancer of its
tissue of origin. Early diagnosis and treatment increase the chance of cure.
Treatment may include CHEMOTHERAPY, surgery, and RADIATION THERAPY. See
also BLADDER CANCER; BREAST CANCER; CARCINOGEN; COLORECTAL CANCER; KAPOSI SAR-
COMA; LAR YNGEAL CANCER; LUNG CANCER; OVARIAN CANCER; PANCREATIC CANCER;
PROSTATE CANCER; SKIN CANCER; STOMACH CANCER; UTERINE CANCER.
Cancer, Tropic of See TROPIC OF CANCER
Cancún
cannabis
NEOCLASSICISM).
Canso, Strait of or Canso Gut Channel, NOVA SCOTIA, Canada. Sepa-
rating mainland Nova Scotia and CAPE BRETON ISLAND, it is 4.5 mi (23 km)
long and 1 mi (2 km) wide, with depths of 200 ft (60 m). Since 1955 the
7,000-ft (2,100-m) Canso Causeway has linked Cape Breton with the
mainland. A navigation lock can handle most oceangoing vessels.
Cantabria
Cantor, Eddie orig. Edward Israel Iskowitz (b. Jan. 31, 1892,
Cantor
capacitance
Aapek
Capote
He and his followers wore robes with pointed hoods (Italian, cappuccino),
went barefoot, and lived in extreme poverty. Other Franciscans harassed
them, and the pope forbade them to extend their membership outside Italy.
The new order was nearly ruined by the defection of their vicar-general,
Bernardino Ochino, to Protestantism in 1542, but it later grew quickly,
reaching a membership of 17,000 by 1571. It was active in the COUNTER-
REFORMATION in keeping the common people loyal to Catholicism. An inde-
pendent order since 1619, they are known for their missionary and social
work.
capuchin (monkey)
eral chemical formula Cn(H2O)n. The carbon (C) atoms are bonded to
hydrogen atoms (5H), hydroxyl groups (5OH; see FUNCTIONAL GROUP),
and carbonyl groups (5C6O), whose combinations, order, and geomet-
ric arrangement lead to a large number of ISOMERs with the same chemi-
cal formula but different properties. The class is further enlarged because
each isomer has various derivatives: uronic acids, sugars with an oxidized
group; sugar alcohols, sugars with a reduced group; GLYCOSIDEs, com-
pounds of sugars with other molecules containing a hydroxyl group; and
amino sugars, sugars with an amino group (see AMINO ACID).
carbolic acid
carbonyl chloride See PHOSGENE
Carborundum
R. ARKWRIGHT, and JOHANN BODMER.
cardiology Medical specialty dealing with HEART DISEASES and disorders.
It began with the 1749 publication by Jean Baptiste de Sénac of contem-
porary knowledge of the heart. Diagnostic methods improved in the 19th
century, and in 1905 the electrocardiograph was invented. The 20th cen-
tury saw many surgical advances in cardiology, including heart transplants
and the use of ARTIFICIAL HEARTS. Current diagnostic methods include chest
percussion (tapping) and AUSCULTATION, ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY, and echocar-
diography (see ULTRASOUND). Cardiologists provide continuing care of heart
patients, doing basic heart-function studies, supervising therapy, includ-
ing drug therapy, and working closely with heart surgeons.
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) Emergency procedure to
Carducci
Carême
his death. His approximately 15 oratorios
(performed in place of operas during
Lent),
including Baltazar, Ezechia,
Jephte, Jonas, and Judicium extremum
made him the principal oratorio composer of the mid-17th century. He
also wrote some 150 cantatas and nearly 100 motets.
Carl XVI Gustaf Swedish Carl Gustaf Folke Hubertus (b. April
30, 1946, Stockholm, Swed.) King of Sweden from 1973. Grandson of
King Gustav VI Adolf (1882–1973), he became crown prince in 1950, his
father having died in 1947. After studying at military schools, he became
a naval officer. His accession occurred at a time when the role of the
Swedish monarchy was being radically altered; the new constitutional
laws of 1973 left the king with a solely symbolic function rather than a
formal role in the country’s administration.
Carleton, Guy See Guy Carleton, 1st Baron DORCHESTER
Carleton
Carlton, Steve in full Steven Norman Carlton (b. Dec. 22, 1944,
Carmarthen
Carnegie
Carol I
Carpathian Mountains
Carriera
Cartel des Gauches
in Voiron, Isère), the monks distill the liqueur that bears the house’s name.
Carthusian nuns are also strictly cloistered and contemplative.
Cartier
the Mississippi River, wintering in a Sioux village. Though his travel
journal (published 1778) was a huge success, he died penniless.
Cary, (Arthur) Joyce (Lunel) (b. Dec. 7, 1888, Londonderry, Ire.—d.
March 29, 1957, Oxford, Oxfordshire, Eng.) British novelist. Cary stud-
ied art in Edinburgh and Paris before graduating from the University of
Oxford. After serving in West Africa in World War I, he began publish-
ing short stories, then novels, some set in Africa, including An American
Visitor (1933) and Mister Johnson (1939). The Horse’s Mouth (1944), his
best-known novel, was the third in a trilogy in which each volume is nar-
rated by one of three protagonists. Other works include a second trilogy,
A Prisoner of Grace (1952), Except the Lord (1953), and Not Honour
More (1955).
caryatid
Casimir
Bol.?) U.S. outlaw. Taking his name from an older outlaw mentor, Cassidy
was a cattle rustler and a robber from the mid-1880s. In 1900 he became
the criminal partner of Harry Longabaugh, the “Sundance Kid” (1870–
1909?), whose nickname derived from a town where he had once been
imprisoned. They became the foremost members of the Wild Bunch, a
group of bank and train robbers. The two eluded Pinkerton detectives by
escaping to South America in 1901. They bought a ranch in Argentina but
returned to a life of outlawry in 1906. In 1909, trapped by soldiers in
Bolivia, Sundance was mortally wounded, and Cassidy shot himself. The
time, place, and circumstances of their deaths vary widely in different
accounts.
Cassini, Gian Domenico (b. June 8, 1625, Perinaldo, Republic of
Genoa—d. Sept. 14, 1712, Paris, France) Italian-born French astronomer.
His early studies were mainly observations of the Sun, but, after obtain-
ing more powerful telescopes, he turned his attention to the planets. He
calculated Jupiter’s and Mars’s rotational periods and compiled a table of
the positions of Jupiter’s satellites. His observations of the Moon (1671–
79) led to his compiling a large map. In 1683, after a study of the ZODIA-
CAL LIGHT, he concluded it was of cosmic origin. He discovered four of
Saturn’s moons: Iapetus (1671), Rhea (1672), Tethys (1684), and Dione
(1684). The dark gap between two of Saturn’s main rings (Cassini’s divi-
sion) is named for him.
Cassiodorus
ferentiation of larvae into various castes is often determined by diet,
though hormonal and environmental factors can also play a role.
Castelo Branco
beanlike seeds. There are hundreds of natural forms and many horticul-
tural varieties of this species.
castration or neutering Removal of the TESTES. The procedure stops
most production of the hormone TESTOSTERONE. If done before PUBERTY, it pre-
vents the development of functioning adult sex organs. Castration after
sexual maturity makes the sex organs shrink and stop functioning, ending
sperm formation and sexual interest and behaviour. Livestock and pets are
castrated to keep them from reproducing (see STERILIZATION) or to create a
more docile animal. In humans, castration has been used for both cultural
(see EUNUCH, CASTRATO) and medical (e.g., for testicular cancer) reasons.
castrato
catalpa
Cateau-Cambrésis
spired with her lover, GRIGOR Y G., COUNT ORLOV, to force Peter to abdi-
cate (he was murdered soon after) and have herself proclaimed empress.
In her 34-year reign she led Russia into full participation in European
political and cultural life. With her ministers she reorganized the admin-
istration and law of the Russian Empire and extended Russian territory,
adding the Crimea and much of Poland. Though she had once intended
to emancipate the serfs, she instead strengthened the system she had once
condemned as inhuman. She had great energy and wide interests, and her
personal life was notable for her many lovers, including GRIGOR Y POTEMKIN.
Catherine de Médicis
of society. CICERO, then consul, learned of the conspiracy; with Senate
approval, he caught and executed a group of the plotters in Rome, and
later sent the army to defeat and kill Catiline in northern Italy (62).
cation
Cattell
See also MACHISMO; PERSONALISMO.
Caulaincourt
cavalry
into the 1940s. JACK BENNY, ED SULLIVAN, LUCILLE BALL, MAR Y TYLER MOORE, and
CCC See CIVILIAN CONSERVATION CORPS
CCD in full charge-coupled device SEMICONDUCTOR device in which
the individual semiconductor components are connected so that the elec-
trical charge at the output of one device provides the input to the next
device. Because they can store electrical charges, CCDs can be used as
memory devices, but they are slower than RAMs. CCDs are sensitive to
light, and are therefore used as the light-detecting components in video
and digital cameras and in optical scanners.
CD See CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT
CD See COMPACT DISC
CD-ROM in full compact disc read-only memory Type of com-
puter storage medium that is read optically (e.g., by a LASER). A CD-ROM
drive uses a low-power laser beam to read digitized (binary) data that have
been encoded onto an optical disc in the form of tiny pits, then feeds the
data to a computer for processing. Because it uses digital data, a CD-ROM
can store images and sound in addition to text and is thus used in video
and audio devices to store music, graphics, and movies (see COMPACT DISC).
Unlike
conventional magnetic-
storage
technologies
(e.g.,
DISKS), CD-ROM drives cannot write
information (that is, accept the input
of new data), hence the tag “read-
only.” Recordable compact discs
(called CD-R) must be written on a
CD-R recorder and can be played on
any CD-ROM drive.
CDC See CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
AND PREVENTION
CeauÃescu
See also WHITE CEDAR.
Cedar Breaks National Monument Preserve, southwestern Utah,
U.S. Established as a national monument in 1933, it consists of a vast
natural amphitheatre (10 sq mi [26 sq km]) eroded in a limestone escarp-
ment. Iron and manganese oxide impurities in the cliff produce an amaz-
ing variety of colours that change constantly.
Cedar Rapids City (pop., 2000: 120,758), eastern Iowa, U.S. Origi-
nally called Rapids City, it was settled in the 1830s next to rapids of the
CEDAR RIVER, a source of waterpower. With the coming of the railroads, it
developed as a grain and livestock market. Neighbouring Kingston was
annexed in 1870, and Kenwood Park in 1926. Its manufactures include
electronic equipment and farm machinery. It was the home of the artist
GRANT WOOD.
Cela (Trulock)
celiac
popularity for its lively account of his tumultuous life and its vivid pic-
ture of Renaissance Italy.
cello
cenotaph
362 I
Central America (cid:2) Central Pacific Railroad
Sea. It includes GUATEMALA, BELIZE, HONDURAS, EL SALVADOR, NICARAGUA,
Mexico: QUINTANA ROO, YUCATÁN, CAMPECHE, TABASCO, and CHIAPAS. Area:
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
SCYTHIAN ART.
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Principal intelligence and coun-
terintelligence agency of the U.S., established in 1947 as a successor to
the World War II-era OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES. The law limits its activi-
ties to foreign countries; it is prohibited from gathering intelligence on
U.S. soil, which is a responsibility of the FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION.
Officially a part of the U.S. Defense Department, it is responsible for pre-
paring analyses for the NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL. Its budget is kept secret.
Though intelligence gathering is its chief occupation, the CIA has also
been involved in many covert operations, including the expulsion of
MOHAMMAD MOSADDEQ from Iran (1953), the attempted BAY OF PIGS INVASION
of Cuba (1961), and support of the Nicaraguan CONTRAs in the 1980s.
central limit theorem In statistics, any of several fundamental theo-
rems in PROBABILITY. Originally known as the law of errors, in its classic
form it states that the sum of a set of independent RANDOM VARIABLES will
approach a NORMAL DISTRIBUTION regardless of the distribution of the indi-
vidual variables themselves, given certain general conditions. Further, the
mean (see MEAN, MEDIAN, AND MODE) of the normal distribution will coin-
cide with the (arithmetic) mean of the (statistical) means of each random
variable.
central nervous system See NERVOUS SYSTEM
Central Pacific Railroad U.S. railroad company founded in 1861 by
a group of California merchants including MARK HOPKINS and LELAND STAN-
central processing unit See CPU
Central Treaty Organization (CENTO) originally Middle East
Treaty Organization or Baghdad Pact Organization Mutual-
security organization, originally composed of Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Pakistan,
and Britain. It was formed in 1955, at the urging of the U.S. and Britain,
to counter the threat of Soviet expansion into the Middle East. CENTO
was never very effective. Iraq withdrew after its anti-Soviet monarchy was
overthrown in 1959. In that same year the U.S. became an associate
member, and CENTO’s headquarters were moved to Ankara, Tur. After
the fall of Mohammad Reza Shah PAHLAVI in 1979, Iran withdrew and
CENTO was dissolved.
Central Valley Spanish Valle Central
CELAIN, POTTER Y, STONEWARE, TERRA-COTTA.
Ceratium
CERN in full Organisation Européenne pour la Recherche
Nucléaire formerly Conseil Européen pour la Recherche
Cernunnos
Cétsamain See BELTANE
Cetshwayo
Chaeronea
Chajang Yulsa
early as the 7th century BC. It established colonies in Macedonia, Italy, and
Sicily and was a base for campaigns against Athens until 411 BC. ARISTOTLE
died in Chalcis in 322 BC. The city became part of Greece in 1830.
chalybite See SIDERITE
Chambal River
Chambers, (David) Whittaker orig. Jay Vivian Chambers (b.
Chambord
when England and France were at war, and he was taken prisoner. In 1632
the colony was restored to France, and in 1633 Champlain made his last
voyage to Quebec, where he lived until his death.
champlevé
Chang Chih-tung See ZHANG ZHIDONG
Chang Chü-cheng See ZHANG JUZHENG
Chang Jiang See YANGTZE RIVER
Chang Tao-Ling See ZHANG DAOLING
Chang Tsai See ZHANG ZAI
Chang Tso-lin See ZHANG ZUOLIN
Chang’an
chanson de geste
a pamphlet arguing that the divisions among abolitionists stemmed from
their disagreements over women’s rights.
Chapultepec
Charles, Ray orig. Ray Charles Robinson (b. Sept. 23, 1930,
Charles I Hungarian Karoly known as Charles Robert of Anjou
376 I
Charles III (cid:2) Charles X Gustav
Charles III known as Charles the Fat
Charles IV orig. Wenceslas known as Charles of Luxembourg
Charles VI known as Charles the Well-Beloved or Charles the
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Charles XIV John Swedish Karl Johan orig. Jean-Baptiste
Bernadotte (b. Jan. 26, 1763, Pau, France—d. March 8, 1844, Stock-
holm, Swed.) King of Sweden and Norway (1818–44). He became an
ardent supporter of the French Revolution and rose rapidly in the army
ranks to brigadier general (1794). Named marshal of France in 1804, he
supported NAPOLEON in several campaigns (1805–09) but subsequently
shifted his allegiance. In 1810 he was invited to become crown prince of
Sweden; taking the name of Charles John, he assumed control of the gov-
ernment. He helped defeat Napoleon at the Battle of LEIPZIG, then defeated
France’s ally Denmark, forcing that country to transfer Norway to the
Swedish crown. On the death of CHARLES XIII in 1818, Charles John became
king of Sweden and Norway. His foreign policy led to a long and favour-
able period of peace.
Charles Albert Italian Carlo Alberto (b. Oct. 2, 1798, Turin, Pied-
mont, French Republic—d. July 28, 1849, Oporto, Port.) King of
Sardinia-Piedmont (1831–49). A member of the house of SAVOY, he
ascended the throne after the death of Charles Felix in 1831. He mitigated
the harsh administration of his country and accelerated its economic and
social development. The spread of revolutionary ideas forced him to grant
a statute for representative government in 1848. After the election of PIUS
IX as pope and the Austrian occupation of Ferrara, he sought to lead the
liberation of Italy. He went to war against Austria in 1848 and again in
1849, but, after his defeat in the Battle of NOVARA, he abdicated in favor
of his son, VICTOR EMMANUEL II.
Charles Edward,
the Young Pretender orig. Charles
Edward Louis Philip Casimir Stuart known as Bonnie Prince
Charlie (b. Dec. 31, 1720, Rome—d. Jan. 31, 1788, Rome) Claimant to
the British throne. He was the son of the royal pretender JAMES EDWARD and
grandson of the exiled JAMES II of England. Seeking to regain the throne, in
1745 the “Young Pretender” landed in Scotland, where he raised an army
of 2,400 among the clans. After taking Edinburgh and routing the English
at Prestonpans, he crossed the English border and reached Derby, but a
lack of strong support from the JACOBITEs and the French forced his retreat
into Scotland. He was decisively defeated at the Battle of CULLODEN (1746)
and, aided by Flora Macdonald (1722–90) and disguised as her maid,
escaped to France. He wandered about Europe trying to revive his cause,
but his debauched behaviour alienated his friends. He settled in Italy in
1766. He later became romanticized in ballads and legends.
Charles Martel
the centre of U.S. gold production. In the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR it was the
site of a Confederate naval yard. Presidents ANDREW JACKSON and JAMES
POLK were born nearby and received their early schooling there. Its indus-
try includes textiles, machinery, and chemical production, and it is the
site of several institutions of higher education.
Charlotte orig. Charlotte Sophia of Mecklenburg-Strelitz (b.
May 19, 1744—d. Nov. 17, 1818) Queen consort of GEORGE III of England.
In 1761 she was selected unseen after the British king asked for a review
of all eligible German Protestant princesses. The marriage was a success,
and the couple had 15 children, including GEORGE IV. After the king was
declared insane (1811), Parliament turned to the future George IV, while
Charlotte was given custody of her husband.
Charlotte Amalie
membership. Born amid an economic depression, the movement rose to
national importance under the leadership of FEARGUS O’CONNOR. Parlia-
ment refused to take action on three Chartist petitions presented to it, and
the movement declined after 1848.
Chartres
RALTY and Kuiu islands on the east and the Chicagof and Baranof islands
on the west, it is 3–10 mi (5–16 km) wide. It forms part of the INSIDE PAS-
SAGE between Alaska and Washington state.
Chattahoochee River
Chavín de Huántar
chelate
tions. See also BIOLOGICAL WARFARE.
chemin de fer
Nationalist Party’s candidate, ending that party’s 55-year rule of Taiwan.
In 2004 Chen was narrowly reelected, the vote coming one day after he
and his running mate, Vice President Annette Lu (Lu Hsiu-lien), were shot
and slightly wounded while campaigning in Tainan.
Chenab
Chernov
Cheshire
Chetumal
Chi-lin See JILIN
ch’i-lin See QILIN
Chi-nan See JINAN
Chiang Ching-kuo or Jiang Jingguo
Chichén Itzá
chicken One of the most widely domesticated poultry species (Gallus
gallus), raised worldwide for its meat and eggs. Descended from the wild
red JUNGLE FOWL of India, chickens have been domesticated for at least 4,000
years. Not until the 19th century did chicken meat and eggs become mass-
production commodities. Modern high-volume poultry farms, with rows of
cages stacked indoors for control of heat, light, and humidity, began to pro-
liferate in Britain c. 1920 and in the U.S. after World War II (see FACTOR Y
FARMING). Females are raised for meat and eggs; immature males are cas-
trated to become meat birds called capons. See also PRAIRIE CHICKEN.
chickenpox or varicella
Childebert
Chiloé
Ch’in tomb (cid:2) China Sea
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
wan into two sections. The northern section is the East China Sea, or
Eastern Sea, which covers an area of some 290,000 sq mi (751,100 sq
km), has a maximum depth of 8,912 ft (2,717 m), and is enclosed by east-
ern China, South Korea, the Japanese island of KYUSHU, the RYUKYU ISLANDS,
and Taiwan. The southern section is the South China Sea, often called
simply the China Sea, which covers an area of 1,423,000 sq mi (3,685,000
sq km), has a maximum depth of about 16,000 ft (5,000 m), and is
enclosed by southeastern China, Taiwan, the Philippines, Borneo, and
mainland Southeast Asia.
chinchilla
person can recognize 3,000–4,000 characters. Efforts have been made to
reduce the number of characters and to simplify their form, though the
fact that they can be read by a speaker of any Chinese language and their
inextricable link with China’s 3,000-year-old culture makes abandonment
of the system unlikely. Chinese characters have also been adapted to write
Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese.
Ch’ing dynasty See QING DYNASTY
Chinggis Khan See GENGHIS KHAN
Ch’ing-hai See QINGHAI
Ch’ing-hai Hu See KOKO NOR
chinoiserie
chiropractic
Chlotar
choline
words of the Lutheran chorales were often Latin plainsong hymn texts
translated into the vernacular. The melodies were often borrowed from
secular song and therefore displayed great melodic and structural simplic-
ity. In modern times the chorale is considered to be a musical setting,
usually polyphonic (multivoiced), of a traditional religious text.
chord Grouping of three or more musical tones, especially as sounded
simultaneously. The tones C-E–G constitute a “C major chord,” or “C
major triad.” Chords may comprise any number of separate tones, and
may be highly dissonant (see CONSONANCE AND DISSONANCE). The term HAR-
MONY is often used loosely as a synonym.
chordate
400 I
Christchurch (cid:2) Christian Social Union
Christian IV, detail of an oil painting by
Pieter Isaacsz, 1612; in Frederiksborg
Castle, Denmark
COURTESY OF DET NATIONALHISTORISKE MUSEUM PÅ
FREDERIKSBORG, DEN.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Christian, Charlie orig. Charles Christian (b. July 29, 1916, Bon-
Christian Democratic Party (Italy) See ITALIAN POPULAR PARTY
Christian Democratic Union (CDU) German political party advo-
also KONRAD ADENAUER; CHRISTIAN DEMOCRACY.
Christian Science Monitor, The Daily newspaper of national and
international news and features, published Monday through Friday in Bos-
ton under the auspices of the Church of Christ, Scientist (see CHRISTIAN
SCIENCE). Established in 1908 at the urging of MAR Y BAKER EDDY as a pro-
test against the sensationalism of the popular press, it became one of the
most respected U.S. newspapers, famous for its thoughtful treatment of
the news and for the quality of its assessments of political, social, and
economic developments. It strictly limits the kinds of advertising it
accepts. It maintains its own bureaus to gather news abroad and publishes
a weekly world edition. The newspaper won its sixth Pulitzer Prize in
1996, in the category of international reporting.
Christian Social Union (CSU) Conservative German political party
that was founded in Bavaria, West Germany, in 1946 by Roman Catholic
Christine de Pisan or Chris-
tine de Pizan
and Protestant groups. It was committed to free enterprise, federalism,
and a united Europe that would operate under Christian principles. From
1946 it held the government of Bavaria continuously, except in 1954–57.
In national elections it usually cooperated with the CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATIC
UNION.
Christian socialism Social and political movement originating in
mid-19th-century Europe. Christian socialists attempted to combine the
fundamental aims of socialism with the religious and ethical convictions
of Christianity, promoting cooperation over competition as a means of
helping the poor. The term was coined in Britain in 1848 after the failure
of the reform movement known as CHARTISM. Christian socialism found
followers in France and Germany, though the German group, led by Adolf
Stoecker, combined its activities with violent ANTI-SEMITISM. Although the
movement died out in the U.S. in the early 20th century, it retains an
important following in Europe.
Christiania See OSLO
Christie, Dame Agatha (Mary Clarissa) (b. Sept. 15, 1890,
Christus
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE’s Henry VI.
chronometer
in 1945. After the war he commanded the Soviet occupation forces in
Germany (1949–53). He headed the Kiev military district (1953–60) and
thereafter held a variety of military assignments in Moscow.
chukar
Churchill, Sir Winston (Leonard Spencer) (b. Nov. 30, 1874,
ATLANTIC CHARTER and at the CAIRO, CASABLANCA, and TEHRAN conferences.
Churrigueresque
known species are in the family Cicadidae and are found in tropical
deserts, grasslands, and forests. Males produce loud noises by vibrating
membranes near the base of the abdomen. Most North American cicadas
produce rhythmical ticks, buzzes, or whines, though the “song” of some
species is musical. The species are easily distinguishable by song, behav-
iour, and appearance. Periodic cicadas (species that occur in large num-
bers in chronologically and geographically isolated broods) appear in
regular cycles, including the well-known 17-year cicada (often errone-
ously called the 17-year LOCUST) and 13-year cicada. The larvae (nymphs)
burrow into the ground, where they remain for 17 or 13 years, feeding
on juices sucked from roots; they then emerge in large numbers to live
aboveground as adults for a single week.
Cicero
Panhandle, southeastern Colorado, and southwestern Kansas, the river-
bed in this area is often dry and is known as the Dry Cimarron. The SANTA
FE TRAIL coursed along its valley for 100 mi (160 km), and travelers knew
the Oklahoma Panhandle as the “Cimarron Cutoff.”
Cimmerian
to light. The controlling mechanism for these cyclic processes within the
body is thought to be the HYPOTHALAMUS. Any change in the circadian cycle
(such as JET LAG and other conditions associated with travel) requires a cer-
tain period for readjustment.
Circassian
cirrhosis
ment and served the interests of the nation-state. The INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
further transformed city life, as factory cities blossomed rapidly in
England, northwestern Europe, and the northeastern U.S. By the mid-20th
century, 30–60% of a country’s population might be living in its major
urban centers. With the rise of the automobile came the growth of sub-
urbs and urban sprawl, as factories, offices, and residences erected in ear-
lier periods became aged and obsolete. Today many cities suffer from lack
of adequate housing, sanitation, recreational space, and transportation
facilities, and face problems of inner-city decay or burgeoning shanty-
towns. Local governments have sought
to alleviate these problems
through URBAN PLANNING.
Ciudad Guayana
nation caused many supporters to withdraw. In the succeeding decades,
leaders sought power through elective office and substantive economic
and educational gains through AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.
civil service Body of government officials employed in civil occupa-
tions that are neither political nor judicial. In well-ordered societies, they
are usually recruited and promoted on the basis of a merit-and-seniority
system, which may include examinations; elsewhere, corruption and
patronage are more important factors. They often serve as neutral advis-
ers to elected officials and political appointees. Though not responsible
for making policy, they are charged with its execution. The civil service
originated in the earliest known Middle Eastern societies; the modern
European civil services date to 17th- and 18th-century Prussia and the
electors of Brandenburg. In the U.S., senior officials change with each
new administration. In Europe, regulations were established in the 19th
century to minimize favouritism and to ensure a wide range of knowledge
and skills among civil service officers. See also CHINESE EXAMINATION SYS-
TEM; SPOILS SYSTEM.
Civil Service Act, Pendleton See PENDLETON CIVIL SERVICE ACT
Civil War See AMERICAN CIVIL WAR
Civil Wars, English See ENGLISH CIVIL WARS
Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) (1933–42) U.S. unemploy-
forms the basis of the legal systems of The Netherlands, Belgium, Lux-
embourg, Italy, Spain, most of France’s former possessions overseas, and
many Latin American countries. German civil law prevails in Austria,
Switzerland, the Scandinavian countries, and certain countries outside
Europe, such as Japan, that have westernized their legal systems. The term
is also used to distinguish the law that applies to private rights from the
law that applies to criminal matters. See also CRIMINAL LAW; TORT.
civil liberty Freedom from arbitrary interference in one’s pursuits by
individuals or by government. The term is usually used in the plural. Civil
liberties are protected explicitly in the constitutions of most democratic
countries. (In authoritarian countries, civil liberties are often formally
guaranteed in a constitution but ignored in practice.) In the U.S., civil
liberties are guaranteed by the BILL OF RIGHTS and the 13th, 14th, and 15th
Amendments to the CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. The Constitution’s
13th Amendment prohibits slavery and involuntary servitude; the 14th
bars the application of any law that would abridge the “privileges and
immunities” of U.S. citizens or deprive any person of “life, liberty, or
property…without DUE PROCESS of law” or deny any person EQUAL PROTEC-
TION under the law; and the 15th guarantees the right of all U.S. citizens
to vote. The related term CIVIL RIGHT is often used to refer to one or more
of these liberties or indirectly to the obligation of government to protect
certain classes of people from violations of one or more of their civil lib-
erties (e.g., the obligation to protect racial minorities from discrimination
on the basis of race). In the U.S., civil rights are protected by the CIVIL
RIGHTS ACT OF 1964 and subsequent legislation. See also AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION.
under Pres. LYNDON B. JOHNSON. See also CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT.
civil rights movement Movement for racial equality in the U.S. that,
through nonviolent protest, broke the pattern of racial segregation in the
South and achieved equal rights legislation for blacks. Following the U.S.
Supreme Court decision in BROWN V. BOARD OF EDUCATION OF TOPEKA (1954),
African American and white supporters attempted to end entrenched seg-
regationist practices. When ROSA PARKS was arrested in 1955 in Montgom-
ery, Ala., an African American boycott of the bus system was led by
MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR., and RALPH ABERNATHY. In the early 1960s the Stu-
dent Nonviolent Coordinating Committee led boycotts and sit-ins to
desegregate many public facilities. Using the nonviolent methods of
MOHANDAS K. GANDHI, the movement spread, forcing the desegregation of
department stores, supermarkets, libraries, and movie theatres. The Deep
South remained adamant in its opposition to most desegregation mea-
sures, often violently; protesters were attacked and occasionally killed.
Their efforts culminated in a march on Washington, D.C., in 1963 to sup-
port civil rights legislation. Following the assassination of JOHN F. KENNEDY,
Pres. LYNDON B. JOHNSON persuaded Congress to pass the CIVIL RIGHTS ACT
OF 1964, a victory that was followed by the VOTING RIGHTS ACT in 1965.
After 1965, militant groups such as the BLACK PANTHER PARTY split off from
the civil rights movement, and riots in black ghettos and King’s assassi-
Clair, René orig. René-Lucien Chomette (b. Nov. 11, 1898, Paris,
CLAM, GEODUCK, QUAHOG, and soft-shell
clam.
clan Kinship group based on actual
or purported DESCENT from a common
ancestor, as traced through the male (patriclan) or the female (matriclan)
line. Clans are normally exogamous, marriage within the clan being
regarded as INCEST. Clans may segment into subclans or lineages, and
genealogical records and myths may be altered to incorporate new mem-
bers who lack KINSHIP ties with the clan. Clan membership may be useful
in ensuring mutual support and defense as well as in the mediation of
disputes over property rights and the mode of residence after MARRIAGE.
Some clans express their unity by means of a common emblem. See also
EXOGAMY AND ENDOGAMY.
clapboard
Clark, Champ orig. James Beauchamp Clark (b. March 7, 1850,
near Lawrenceburg, Ky., U.S.—d. March 2, 1921, Washington, D.C.) U.S.
politician. Clark moved to Missouri in 1876 and settled at Bowling Green.
He was successively a newspaper editor, a prosecuting attorney, and a
state legislator; he was then elected to the U.S. House of Representatives,
where he served 13 terms (1893–95, 1897–1921). A follower of WILLIAM
JENNINGS BR YAN, he supported agrarian measures. As a member of the
House rules committee in 1910, he led the revolt against JOSEPH CANNON
and succeeded him as speaker (1911–19). At the 1912 Democratic Party
convention, Clark was a leading contender for the presidential nomina-
tion until Bryan switched his support to Woodrow Wilson.
Clark, Dick in full Richard Wagstaff Clark (b. Nov. 30, 1929,
Helen Clark, 2005.
SEAN GALLUP/GETTY IMAGES
clarinet (cid:2) class
1981 and served as its chairman 1982–94, building it into a billion-dollar
company that produced workstations for graphics-intensive applications.
In 1994 he cofounded Netscape Communications, whose graphical inter-
face Web browser revolutionized the Internet by making it easy to access
Internet documents.
Clark (of Saltwood), Kenneth (Mackenzie) Clark, Baron (b.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Claude Lorrain
(see THERMAE), AMPHITHEATERS, and TRIUMPHAL ARCHES. Classical architecture
Judaea a province. He encouraged
urbanization, spent lavishly on pub-
lic works, and extended Roman citi-
zenship
throughout
empire.
Having executed his scheming third
wife, Valeria Messalina, in 48, he
married his niece AGRIPPINA THE
YOUNGER. She pressured Claudius
into naming her son Lucius (later
NERO) heir instead of his own son
Britannicus. Claudius may have been
poisoned by Agrippina.
Claudius
Caecus
in 1901 by the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty, under which the British govern-
ment agreed to allow the U.S. to construct and control the canal.
Clazomenae
Clement of Alexandria, Saint Latin Titus Flavius Clemens (b.
Clemente
Clermont
Clinton, George (b. July 26, 1739, Little Britain, N.Y.—d. April 20,
1812, Washington, D.C., U.S.) U.S. politician, fourth vice president of
the U.S. (1805–12). A veteran of the French and Indian War, he was a
leading member of the New York assembly (1768–75) and a delegate to
the CONTINENTAL CONGRESS (1775). As governor of New York (1777–95,
1801–04), he was a forceful leader and able administrator; he led the
opposition to the state’s adoption of the U.S. Constitution. A supporter of
THOMAS JEFFERSON, he was twice elected vice president (with Jefferson and
JAMES MADISON); he died in office.
Clinton, Hillary Rodham orig. Hillary Diane Rodham (b. Oct.
cliometrics
Cline, Patsy orig. Virginia Patterson Hensley (b. Sept. 8, 1932,
Clinton, Bill in full William Jefferson Clinton orig. William
Clitunno River
Close
Cluj-Napoca
also HYDRA; PORTUGUESE MAN-OF-WAR; SEA ANEMONE.
Cnidus
cobia
cocaine HETEROCYCLIC COMPOUND (C17H21NO4), an ALKALOID obtained from
coccus
Cockpit Country Region, west-
Cocteau
diagnosis, codependency is a psychological syndrome noted in relatives
or partners of alcoholics or substance abusers.
codex Manuscript BOOK, especially of Scripture, early literature, or
ancient mythological or historical annals. The earliest type of manuscript
in the form of a modern book (i.e., a collection of pages stitched together
along one side), the codex replaced earlier rolls of papyrus and wax tab-
lets. Among its advantages, it could be opened at once to any point in the
text, it permitted writing on both sides of the leaf, and it could contain
long texts. The oldest extant Greek codex is the Codex Sinaiticus (4th
century AD), a biblical manuscript. Codices were developed separately by
pre-Columbian Mesoamericans after c. AD 1000.
Codium
discharged to the condenser, which would waste the remaining energy in
the steam. The steam at the higher pressure can provide large amounts of
lower-temperature energy for heating buildings or evaporating brine in a
chemical plant. Considerable overall energy savings can be obtained by
cogeneration. See also STEAM ENGINE.
cogito, ergo sum Latin “I think, therefore I am” Dictum coined
cognac
also CAISSON.
Cohan
Coleman, (Randolph Denard) Ornette (b. March 9, 1930, Fort
Coleraine
Colima
colloid
Colonial National Historical Park Historical reservation, south-
small islands. See also DECOLONIZATION, DEPENDENCY, IMPERIALISM.
colonnade Row of columns generally supporting an ENTABLATURE, used
either as an independent feature (e.g., a covered walkway) or as part of a
building (e.g., a PORTICO). The earliest colonnades appear in the temple
architecture of ancient Greece. In a BASILICA, colonnades are used to sepa-
rate the side aisles from the central space. See also STOA.
colony In antiquity, any of the new settlements established in territory
conquered by the Greeks (8th–6th century BC), ALEXANDER THE GREAT (4th
century BC), and the Romans (4th century BC–AD 2nd century). Greek
colonies extended to Italy, Sicily, Spain,
the eastern Mediterranean
(including Egypt), and the Black Sea. Alexander pushed even farther into
Central Asia, South Asia, and Egypt. Roman colonization covered much
of the same area and regions south to northern Africa, west to Spain, and
north to Britain and Germany. Reasons for colonizing included expansion
of trade, acquisition of raw materials, resolution of political unrest or
overpopulation, and craving for land and rewards. Colonies retained ties
and loyalty to Rome, though rebelliousness was not uncommon. In Roman
colonies after 177 BC, colonists retained Roman citizenship and could
exercise full political rights. Ancient colonization spread Hellenic and
Roman culture to the far reaches of the empires, often assimilating local
populations, some of whom acquired Roman citizenship.
colony In zoology, a group of organisms of one SPECIES that live and
interact closely with each other in an organized fashion. A colony differs
from an aggregation, in which the group has no cooperative or organized
function. Colonies of social insects (e.g., ants, bees) usually include CASTES
with different responsibilities. Many birds form temporary breeding colo-
nies, in some cases to stimulate reproductive activities, in others to make
the best use of a limited breeding habitat and to coordinate efforts in pro-
tecting nests from predators. Certain mammals that live in close groups
are said to be colonial, though they lack cooperative activities and each
maintains a territory.
Colophon
colostomy
COLUMNIATION, ORDER.
coma Complete lack of conscious-
ness, with loss of reaction to stimu-
lus and of spontaneous nervous activity. It is usually associated with
cerebral injury of metabolic or physical origin. Simple CONCUSSIONs cause
short losses of consciousness. Coma from lack of oxygen may last sev-
eral weeks and is often fatal. Coma caused by STROKE can be sudden, while
that caused by metabolic abnormalities (as in DIABETES MELLITUS) or cerebral
TUMOURs comes on gradually. Treatment depends on the cause.
Comana
Columbus, Christopher Italian Cristoforo Colombo Spanish
Cristóbal Colón (b. between Aug. 26 and Oct. 31?, 1451, Genoa—d.
May 20, 1506, Valladolid, Spain) Genoese navigator and explorer whose
transatlantic voyages opened the way for European exploration, exploi-
tation, and colonization of the Americas. He began his career as a young
seaman in the Portuguese merchant marine. In 1492 he obtained the spon-
sorship of the Spanish monarchs FERDINAND II and ISABELLA I for an attempt
to reach Asia by sailing westward over what was presumed to be open
Comaneci
SCHULZ. See also COMIC BOOK.
Cominform in full Communist Information Bureau Agency of
international communism founded under Soviet auspices in 1947. Its
original members were the Communist Parties of the Soviet Union, Bul-
garia, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Yugoslavia, France,
and Italy, but Yugoslavia was expelled in 1948. The Cominform’s activi-
ties consisted mainly of publishing propaganda to encourage international
communist solidarity. It was dissolved by Soviet initiative in 1956 as part
of a Soviet program of reconciliation with Yugoslavia.
Comintern or Communist International or Third Interna-
Comitia Centuriata
Commodus in full Caesar Marcus Aurelius Commodus
Antoninus Augustus
Lucius Aelius Aurelius Com-
orig.
modus (b. Aug. 31, 161, Lanu-
vium, Latium—d. Dec. 31, 192)
Roman emperor (AD 177–92). He
ruled with his father, MARCUS AURE-
LIUS, until the latter’s death in 180;
recalled from the frontier, Commo-
dus plunged into a life of dissipation
in Rome. After his sister tried to have
him killed (182), he executed the
senators involved and began ruling
capriciously. His brutality stirred
unrest that ended years of Roman
stability and prosperity. He renamed
Colonia
Commodiana
(“Colony of Commodus”). Physi-
cally impressive, he claimed he was
Hercules and performed as a gladia-
tor. His mistress and advisers had
him strangled, ending the Antonine
dynasty.
common cold See common COLD
common fox See RED FOX
common gallinule See MOORHEN
common law Body of law based on custom and general principles and
that, embodied in case law, serves as precedent or is applied to situations
not covered by statute. Under the common-law system, when a court
decides and reports its decision concerning a particular case, the case
becomes part of the body of law and can be used in later cases involving
similar matters. This use of precedents is known as STARE DECISIS. Common
law has been administered in the courts of England since the Middle Ages;
it is also found in the U.S. and in most of the British Commonwealth. It
is distinguished from CIVIL LAW.
common-law marriage Marriage that is without a civil or religious
ceremony and is based on the parties’ agreement to consider themselves
married and usually also on their cohabitation for a period of time. Most
jurisdictions no longer allow this type of marriage to be formed, though
they may recognize such marriages formed before a certain date or formed
in ajurisdiction that permits such marriages.
common-lead dating See URANIUM-THORIUM-LEAD DATING
Common Market See EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
Common Pleas, Court of English court of law founded in 1178 to
hear civil disputes. Under the MAGNA CARTA (1215), it attained jurisdic-
tion separate from the King’s (Queen’s) Court, though its decisions were
subject to review by the latter. Beginning in the 15th century, it competed
with the King’s (Queen’s) Court and the Court of EXCHEQUER for COMMON-
LAW business. By the 19th century, the complexity of overlapping juris-
dictional rules had become unbearable, and all three courts were replaced
(under the Judicature Act of 1873) by the Supreme Court of Judicature,
which remains the court of general jurisdiction in England and Wales.
Common Prayer, Book of See BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER
common rorqual See FIN WHALE
Commoner, Barry (b. May 28, 1917, Brooklyn, N.Y.) U.S. biologist
and educator. He studied at Harvard University and taught at Washington
University and Queens College. His warnings, since the 1950s, of the
environmental threats posed by modern technology (including nuclear
weapons, use of pesticides and other toxic chemicals, and ineffective
waste management) in such works as his classic Science and Survival
(1966) made him one of the foremost environmentalist spokesmen of his
time. He was a third-party candidate for U.S. president in 1980.
Commons, House of Popularly elected lower house of the bicameral
British PARLIAMENT. Passage of legislation is its primary function. Because
it alone has the power to levy taxes and allocate expenditures, it is Brit-
ain’s chief legislative authority. It originated in the late 13th century, when
landholders and other property owners began sending representatives to
Parliament to present grievances and petitions to the king and to accept
commitments to the payment of taxes. It was the less powerful house until
1911, when the Reform Bill of that year gave it the power to override the
HOUSE OF LORDS. The party with the greatest representation in the Com-
mons forms the government, and the PRIME MINISTER chooses the CABINET from
the party’s members. There are 646 members, elected from single-
member districts. See also Canadian PARLIAMENT; PARLIAMENTAR Y DEMOCRACY.
Commons, John R(ogers) (b. Oct. 13, 1862, Hollandsburg, Ohio,
U.S.—d. May 11, 1945, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.) U.S. economist. He taught
at the University of Wisconsin (1904–32) and published works such as A
Documentary History of American Industrial Society (10 vol., 1910–11)
and A History of Labor in the United States (4 vol., 1918–35), in which
he linked the evolution of the U.S. labour movement to changes in the
market structure. He drafted reform legislation for Wisconsin and worked
for the federal government in areas including civil service and worker’s
compensation.
commonwealth Body politic founded on law for the common “weal,”
or good. The term was often used by 17th-century writers to signify an
organized political community, its meaning thus being similar to the mod-
ern meaning of state or nation. Today it primarily refers to the COMMON-
WEALTH. Four U.S. states (Kentucky, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and
Virginia) call themselves commonwealths, a distinction in name only.
Puerto Rico has been a commonwealth rather than a state since 1952; its
residents, though U.S. citizens, have only a nonvoting representative in
Congress and pay no federal taxes.
Commonwealth or Commonwealth of Nations Free associa-
See also BRITISH EMPIRE.
Commonwealth Games Quadrennial sports competition for coun-
tries of the British Commonwealth. The inaugural meeting was called the
British Empire Games and was held in Hamilton, Ont., Can., in 1930.
The Games include athletics (TRACK AND FIELD), GYMNASTICS, BOWLS, and SWIM-
MING events for both men and women, and BOXING, CYCLING, SHOOTING, WEIGHT
LIFTING, and WRESTLING for men only. ROWING, BADMINTON, and FENCING have
also occasionally been included.
Commonwealth of Independent States Free association of sov-
ereign states formed in 1991, comprising Russia and 11 other republics
that were formerly part of the Soviet Union. Members are Russia,
Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Moldova. Its administra-
tive center is in Minsk, Belarus. The Commonwealth’s functions are to
coordinate its members’ policies regarding their economies, foreign rela-
tions, defense, immigration policies, environmental protection, and law
enforcement.
commune
gious principles; monastic life is essentially communal (see MONASTICISM).
B. F. SKINNER’s Walden Two (1948) inspired many American attempts at
communal living, especially in the late 1960s and early 1970s. See also
COLLECTIVE FARM, COMMUNITARIANISM, KIBBUTZ, MOSHAV.
commune
commutative law Two closely related laws of number operations. In
symbols, they are stated: a + b = b + a and ab = ba. Stated in words:
Quantities to be added or multiplied can be combined in any order. More
generally, if two procedures give the same result when carried out in arbi-
trary order, they are commutative. Exceptions occur (e.g., in vector mul-
tiplication). See also ASSOCIATIVE LAW, DISTRIBUTIVE LAW.
Commynes
THEOR Y).
complex variable In mathematics, a VARIABLE that can take on the value
of a COMPLEX NUMBER. In basic algebra, the variables x and y generally stand
for values of real numbers. The algebra of complex numbers (complex
analysis) uses the complex variable z to represent a number of the form
a + bi. The modulus of z is its ABSOLUTE VALUE. A complex variable may be
graphed as a VECTOR from the origin to the point (a,b) in a rectangular
COORDINATE SYSTEM, its modulus corresponding to the vector’s length. Called
an Argand diagram, this representation establishes a connection between
complex analysis and vector analysis. See also EULER’S FORMULA.
composite family Family Compositae, one of the largest plant fami-
lies (also known as Asteraceae, DAISY family, and ASTER family), which con-
tains more than 1,100 genera and almost 20,000 species of herbaceous
plants, shrubs, and trees, found throughout the world. Though diverse in
habit and habitat, composites tend to grow in sunlit places in temperate
and subtropical regions. The family includes many garden ornamentals,
including AGERATUMs, asters, CHR YSANTHEMUMs, COSMOS, DAHLIAs, MARIGOLDs,
and ZINNIAs. Some genera include weeds such as DANDELION, RAGWEED, and
THISTLE. ARTEMISIA, ARTICHOKE, ENDIVE, SAFFLOWER, SALSIFY, LETTUCE, and SUNFLOWER
chologists. See also DYSLEXIA; LATERALITY; PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING; SPEECH.
power and CONTROL SYSTEMS (see PNEUMATIC DEVICE).
Compromise of 1867 or Ausgleich
Compton effect Change in WAVELENGTH of X RAYS and other energetic
forms of ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION when they collide with ELECTRONS. It is
a principal way in which radiant energy is absorbed by matter, and is
caused by the transfer of energy from PHOTONS to electrons. When pho-
tons collide with electrons that are free or loosely bound in atoms, they
transfer some of their energy and momentum to the electrons, which then
recoil. New photons of less energy and momentum, and hence longer
wavelength, are produced; these scatter at various angles, depending on
the amount of energy lost to the recoiling electrons. The effect demon-
strates the nature of the photon as a true particle with both energy and
momentum. Its discovery in 1922 by ARTHUR COMPTON was essential to
establishing the WAVE-PARTICLE DUALITY of ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION.
computed axial tomography
444 I
computer-integrated manufacturing (cid:2) computer science
A typical personal computer system consists of the computer itself, a video monitor, a keyboard, a mouse, and speakers. Other peripheral devices may include a printer,
scanner, camera, microphone, or external storage device. Chips and circuit boards (“cards”) are plugged into the motherboard. Other components, such as disk drives,
are housed in the computer case and controlled by a card called a controller. The microprocessor directs the computer’s activity via the motherboard and processes data
with its millions of transistors. Data and programs in use are stored in the RAM chips. The floppy and hard drives store data not in immediate use on magnetic disks. Opti-
cal disks, such as CD-ROMs and DVDs, may store data as well. Some circuit boards are dedicated to specific functions; the sound card, for example, generates sounds and
music. Additional boards, such as a modem, may be added by inserting them into an expansion slot, a row of electrical connectors into which the board is plugged. The
mouse is an input device used to position a pointer on the computer’s screen. On-screen selections are made by “clicking” one of the mouse’s buttons, sending a signal to
the computer.
© ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
cal systems. See also COMPUTER ANIMATION; COMPUTER ART.
computer-integrated manufacturing Data-driven AUTOMATION
by computers before the system is built in an attempt to eliminate wast-
age. See also ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, EXPERT SYSTEMS, ROBOTICS.
computer network See computer NETWORK
computer printer See computer PRINTER
computer program See computer PROGRAM
computer science Study of computers, their design (see COMPUTER
ARCHITECTURE), and their uses for computation, DATA PROCESSING, and systems
control, including design and development of computer HARDWARE and
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
OGNITION.
computing, quantum See QUANTUM COMPUTING
Comstock, Anthony (b. March 7, 1844, New Canaan, Conn.,
U.S.—d. Sept. 21, 1915, New York, N.Y.) U.S. social reformer. He was
an early agitator against abortion and pornography, lobbying successfully
for the enactment (1873) of a severe federal statute outlawing the trans-
portation of obscene matter in the mails (the Comstock Law). In that same
year, he founded the Society for the Suppression of Vice, which he
directed until his death. As a special agent of the U.S. Post Office (1873–
1915), he conducted spectacular raids on publishers and vendors. His
books include Traps for the Young (1883) and Morals Versus Art (1888).
Comte
those of AIX-LA-CHAPELLE, TROPPAU, LAIBACH, and VERONA.
concerto
and increase strength. See also PRECAST CONCRETE, PRESTRESSED CONCRETE, REIN-
FORCED CONCRETE.
concubinage
including FELIX MENDELSSOHN, HECTOR BERLIOZ, and RICHARD WAGNER, were
composers themselves. By the end of the 19th century, conducting had
become a specialty and the great conductors had become celebrities in
their own right.
conduction See THERMAL CONDUCTION
cone or strobilus
CHOS©N DYNASTY and in Japan during the TOKUGAWA PERIOD.
Confucius Chinese Kongfuzi or K’ung-fu-tzu
Congo, Republic of the known as Congo (Brazzaville) formerly
Middle Congo Republic, west-central Africa. Area: 132,047 sq mi
(342,000 sq km). Population (2005 est.): 3,602,000. Capital: BRAZZAVILLE.
Congo River or Zaire
Conkling, Roscoe (b. Oct. 30, 1829, Albany, N.Y., U.S.—d. April 18,
1888, New York, N.Y.) U.S. politician. He was a lawyer, orator, and leader
of the WHIG PARTY. He served in the U.S. House of Representatives (1859–
65) and Senate (1867–81). As a leader of the RADICAL REPUBLICANs, he sup-
ported severe RECONSTRUCTION measures. Resisting efforts by Pres.
RUTHERFORD B. HAYES to achieve civil service reform, he retained control of
New York state’s patronage system. At the 1880 Republican convention,
he led the Stalwart faction in supporting former Pres. ULYSSES S. GRANT.
In 1881 he resigned from the Senate in a patronage dispute with Pres.
JAMES GARFIELD.
Connacht or Connaught
MANNERS with his brilliant comic dialogue, satirical portrayal of fashion-
able society, uproarious bawdiness, and ironic scrutiny of the affectations
of his age. See also RESTORATION LITERATURE.
ERING PLANT).
Connolly, Maureen (Catherine) (b. Sept. 17, 1934, San Diego,
Connor, Ralph orig. Charles William Gordon (b. Sept. 13, 1860,
Indian Lands, Glengarry county, Ont., Can.—d. Oct. 31, 1937, Winnipeg,
Man.) Canadian novelist. Ordained a Presbyterian minister in 1890, Con-
nor became a missionary to mining and lumber camps in the Canadian
Rocky Mountains; this experience and memories of his childhood in Glen-
garry, Ont., provided material for his novels, including The Sky Pilot
(1899) and The Prospector (1904), which, combining adventure with reli-
gious messages and wholesome sentiment, made him the best-selling
Canadian novelist of the early 20th century. His best books are considered
to be The Man from Glengarry (1901) and Glengarry School Days (1902).
Connors, Jimmy in full James Scott Connors (b. Sept. 2, 1952,
conodont
Conservative Party (Canada) See PROGRESSIVE CONSERVATIVE PARTY
OF CANADA
Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers
sory military service by all able-bodied men between certain ages, though
a few countries—notably Israel—have also drafted women.) In the 19th
century Prussia’s system of building up a large standing army through
conscription became the model for competing European powers. During
the American Civil War both the federal government and the Confederacy
instituted a draft, but the U.S. did not use it again until entering World
War I in 1917. Like the U.S., Britain abandoned conscription at the end
of World War I but reverted to it when World War II threatened. During
the ensuing Cold War, Britain retained the draft until 1960 and the U.S.
until 1973. See also U.S. ARMY.
consequentialism In ETHICS, the doctrine that actions should be judged
right or wrong on the basis of their consequences. The simplest form of
consequentialism is classical (or hedonistic) UTILITARIANISM, which asserts
that an action is right or wrong according to whether it maximizes the net
balance of pleasure over pain in the universe. The consequentialism of
G.E. MOORE, known as “ideal utilitarianism,” recognizes beauty and
friendship, as well as pleasure, as intrinsic goods that one’s actions should
aim to maximize. According to the “preference utilitarianism” of R.M.
Hare (1919–2002), actions are right if they maximize the satisfaction of
preferences or desires, no matter what the preferences may be for. Con-
sequentialists also differ over whether each individual action should be
judged on the basis ofits consequences or whether instead general rules
of conduct should be judged in this way and individual actions judged
only by whether they accord with a general rule. The former group are
known as “act-utilitarians” and the latter as “rule-utilitarians.” See also
DEONTOLOGICAL ETHICS.
conservation law or law of conservation In physics, the prin-
PARTY, the German CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATIC UNION, the U.S. REPUBLICAN PARTY,
and the Japanese LIBERAL-DEMOCRATIC PARTY. See also CHRISTIAN DEMOCRACY;
LIBERALISM.
Conservative Judaism Form of Judaism that mediates between
REFORM JUDAISM and ORTHODOX JUDAISM. Founded in 19th-century Germany
as the Historical School, it arose among German-Jewish theologians who
advocated change but found Reform positions extreme. They accepted the
Reform emphasis on critical scholarship, but wished to maintain a stricter
observance of Jewish law (e.g., dietary laws) and continued belief in the
coming of the MESSIAH. In 1886, rabbis of this centrist persuasion founded
the Jewish Theological Seminary of America (New York), leading to the
development of Conservative Judaism as a religious movement.
Constance (b. 1154—d. Nov. 27, 1198, Palermo) Queen of Sicily
(1194–98) and Holy Roman empress-consort (1191–97). The daughter of
King ROGER II of Sicily, she married the future emperor HENR Y VI in 1186
and was later crowned with him in Rome. Her marriage gave the HOHEN-
STAUFEN DYNASTY a claim to the Sicilian throne, which she asserted against
the opposition of her nephew TANCRED. When Henry died (1197), she
secured the protection of Pope INNOCENT III and had her son FREDERICK II
crowned king in 1198.
Constance, Council of (1414–18) 16th ecumenical council of the
Roman Catholic church. It was convened at the request of Emperor
SIGISMUND to deal with three competing popes, examine the writings of
JAN HUS and JOHN WYCLIFFE, and reform the Church. National political
rivalries divided the Council of Constance. Two of the three contending
popes were deposed; the third abdicated, and in 1417 the council selected
a new pope, Martin V. The Council condemned propositions of Hus and
Wycliffe, and Hus was burned at the stake by secular authorities.
Constance, Lake German Bodensee
Constantine V Copronymus
456 I
Constitution of 1795 (cid:2) consumer credit
Constitution of 1795 (Year III) French constitution established dur-
ing the THERMIDORIAN REACTION in the FRENCH REVOLUTION. Known as the Con-
Constitution of the Third Republic See CONSTITUTIONAL LAWS OF
Constitution of the United States Fundamental law of the U.S.
See also CIVIL LIBERTY; COMMERCE CLAUSE; EQUAL RIGHTS AMENDMENT; ESTABLISHMENT
CLAUSE; FREEDOM OF SPEECH; JUDICIAR Y; STATES’ RIGHTS.
Constitution of the Year VIII (1799) French constitution established
after the Coup of 18–19 BRUMAIRE during the FRENCH REVOLUTION. Drafted by
EMMANUEL JOSEPH SIEYES, it disguised the true character of the military dic-
tatorship created by NAPOLEON, reassuring the partisans of the Revolution
by proclaiming the irrevocability of the sale of national property and by
upholding the legislation against the ÉMIGRÉ NOBILITY. It created the regime
known as the CONSULATE, which concentrated all real power in the hands
of Napoleon. Submitted to a plebiscite, it won overwhelmingly in 1800.
Constitutional Act or Canada Bill (1791) British law repealing
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Constitutional Democratic Party or Kadet Russian political
DUCER GOODS.
CONSUMERISM, RALPH NADER.
consumer goods (cid:2) Continental Congress
Economists use statistical information on income and purchases to trace
trends in consumption, seeking to map consumer demand for goods and
services. In CLASSICAL ECONOMICS, consumers are assumed to be rational and
to allocate expenditures in such a way as to maximize total satisfaction
from all purchases. Incomes and PRICEs are seen as consumption’s two
major determinants. Critics of the model point out that there are many
exceptions to rational consumer behaviour—for example, the phenom-
enon of conspicuous consumption, in which the high price of a product
increases its prestige and adds to demand.
consumption See TUBERCULOSIS
consumption tax Levy such as an excise tax, a SALES TAX, or a TARIFF
paid directly or indirectly by the consumer. Consumption taxes fall more
heavily on lower-income than on upper-income groups because people
with less money consume a larger proportion of their income than those
with more money. See also PROGRESSIVE TAX, REGRESSIVE TAX.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
458 I
Continental Divide (cid:2) continuity principle
The theory of continental drift is based on the concept that the continental and oce-
anic crusts are embedded in the uppermost layer of the rocky lithosphere. The lithos-
phere is divided into sections called tectonic plates, which slide over an underlying
partly molten layer of rock called the asthenosphere. New lithosphere is created at
diverging plate margins (e.g., midocean ridges), and old lithosphere is consumed at
converging margins (e.g., subduction zones). The continents passively “drift” along
with the moving plates, and over hundreds of millions of years this movement alters
the entire geography of the Earth.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
Continental philosophy Collective term for the many distinct
philospohical traditions, methods, and styles that predominated on the
European continent (particularly in France and Germany) from the time
of IMMANUEL KANT. It is usually understood in contrast with ANALYTIC PHILOSO-
PHY, also called Anglo-American philosophy. In the 20th century it encom-
passed schools such as PHENOMENOLOGY, EXISTENTIALISM, structuralism, and
DECONSTRUCTION and thinkers such as MARTIN HEIDEGGER, JEAN-PAUL SARTRE,
MAURICE MERLEAU-PONTY, MICHEL FOUCAULT, and JACQUES DERRIDA. See also
STRUCTURALISM; POSTSTRUCTURALISM.
continental shelf Broad, relatively shallow submarine platform that
forms a border to a continent, typically extending from the coast to depths
of 330–660 ft (100–200 m). Continental shelves average about 40 mi (65
km) in width. Almost everywhere they are simply a continuation of the
continental landmass: narrow, rough, and steep off mountainous coasts
but broad and comparatively level offshore from plains. Continental
shelves are usually covered with a layer of sand, silts, and silty muds.
Their surfaces feature small hills and ridges that alternate with shallow
depressions and valley-like troughs. In a few cases, steep-walled V-shaped
submarine canyons cut deeply into both the shelf and the slope below.
See illustration above.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
The broad, gentle pitch of the continental shelf gives way to the relatively steep con-
tinental slope. The more gradual transition to the abyssal plain is a sediment-filled
region called the continental rise. The continental shelf, slope, and rise are collec-
tively called the continental margin. Depth is exaggerated here for effect.
© ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
continental shield Any of the large stable areas of low relief (little
variation in elevations) in the Earth’s CRUST that are composed of PRECAM-
BRIAN crystalline rocks. These rocks are always more than 570 million
years old, and some are as old as 2–3 billion years. Continental shields
occur on each of the continents.
continental slope Seaward border of a CONTINENTAL SHELF. The world’s
combined continental slope is about 200,000 mi (300,000 km) long and
descends at an average angle of about 4° from the edge of the continen-
tal shelf to the beginning of the ocean basins at depths of 330–10,500 ft
(100–3,200 m). The slope is most gradual off stable coasts without major
rivers and is steepest off coasts with young mountain ranges and narrow
continental shelves. Slopes off mountainous coastlines and narrow shelves
commonly have outcrops of rock. The dominant sediments of continen-
tal slopes are muds; there are smaller amounts of sediments of sand or
gravel.
Continental System In the NAPOLEONIC WARS, the blockade designed
by NAPOLEON to paralyze Britain through the destruction of British com-
merce. In the Decrees of Berlin (1806) and MILAN (1807), France pro-
claimed that neutrals and French allies were not to trade with the British.
The United Kingdom responded with a counterblockade, which led indi-
rectly to the WAR OF 1812. Because of Britain’s naval superiority, the
effort to enforce the system proved disastrous for Napoleon.
continuing education or adult education Any form of learning
continuity principle or continuity equation Principle of FLUID
Contreras
SOMOZA FAMILY). The U.S. CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY played a key role in
included a high incidence of PELVIC INFLAMMATOR Y DISEASE, ECTOPIC PREGNANCY,
contralto See ALTO
460 I
conveyor belt (cid:2) Coolidge
of the uterus.) Disorders with symptoms similar to those of conversion
disorder include factitious disorder, DISSOCIATIVE IDENTITY DISORDER, and PER-
SONALITY DISORDER (histrionic type).
conveyor belt One of various devices that provide mechanized move-
ment of material, as in a FACTOR Y. Conveyor belts are used in industrial
applications and also on large farms, in warehousing and freight-handling,
and in movement of raw materials. Belt conveyors of fabric, rubber, plas-
tic, leather, or metal are driven by a power-operated roll mounted under-
neath or at one end of the conveyor. The belt forms a continuous loop and
is supported either on rollers (for heavy loads) or on a metal slider pan
(if loads are light enough to prevent frictional drag on the belt). Motors
operating through constant- or variable-speed reduction gears usually pro-
vide the power.
convolvulus See BINDWEED
Cook, Mt. See MOUNT COOK NATIONAL PARK
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
tion by calling out the state guard
during the BOSTON POLICE STRIKE in
ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
Calvin Coolidge.
CONDITIONING, HEAT EXCHANGER.
Coomassie See KUMASI
coon cat See MAINE COON CAT
Cooper, Alfred Duff, 1st Viscount Norwich of Aldwick (b.
Cooper, Gary orig. Frank James Cooper (b. May 7, 1901, Hel-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Coolidge (cid:2) coordinate system I
Co-operative Commonwealth Federation Political party
prominent in western Canada in the 1930s and ’40s. It was founded in
Calgary, Alta., in 1932 by a federation of farm, labour, and socialist par-
ties to transform the capitalist system into a “cooperative commonwealth”
by democratic means. It called for the socialization of banks and public
ownership of transportation, communication, and natural resources. It
won the general election in Saskatchewan in 1944 and took over the pro-
vincial government. It won further Saskatchewan elections but declined
elsewhere. In 1961 it merged with the NEW DEMOCRATIC PARTY.
coordinate geometry See ANALYTIC GEOMETR Y
coordinate system Arrangement of reference lines or curves used to
identify the location of points in space. In two dimensions, the most com-
mon system is the Cartesian (after RENÉ DESCARTES) system. Points are des-
ignated by their distance along a horizontal (x) and vertical (y) axis from
a reference point, the origin, designated (0, 0). Cartesian coordinates also
can be used for three (or more) dimensions. A polar coordinate system
locates a point by its direction relative to a reference direction and its
distance from a given point, also the origin. Such a system is used in radar
or sonar tracking and is the basis of bearing-and-range navigation sys-
tems. In three dimensions, it leads to cylindrical and spherical coordinates.
coordinate system, spherical See SPHERICAL COORDINATE SYSTEM
print until he was on his deathbed. By attributing to Earth a daily rota-
tion around its own axis and a yearly revolution around a stationary Sun,
he developed an idea that had far-reaching implications for the rise of
modern science. He asserted, in contrast to Platonic instrumentalism, that
astronomy must describe the real, physical system of the world. Only with
JOHANNES KEPLER was Copernicus’s model fully transformed into a new
philosophy about the fundamental structure of the universe.
copier See PHOTOCOPIER
Copland
ters such as an idea, process, or system. Protection in the U.S. now extends
for the life of the creator plus 70 years after his or her death. Works made
for hire are now protected for a maximum of 95 years from the date of
publication or 120 years from the date of the creation of the work. In
1988 the U.S. joined the BERN CONVENTION, an agreement that governs
international copyright. The Digital Millennium Copyright Act, adopted
in the U.S. in 1998, expanded owners’ control over digital forms of their
creations and penalized persons who sought to evade technological shields
(such as encryption) for copyrighted material. See also INTELLECTUAL PROP-
ERTY; PATENT; TRADEMARK.
coquina
Cordobés
cormorant
cornflower See BACHELOR’S BUTTON
Cornplanter or John O’Bail (b. c. 1732, New York?—d. Feb. 18,
1836, Warren county, Pa., U.S.) American Indian leader. Born to a white
trader and a Seneca mother, he fought alongside the British in the Ameri-
can Revolution, leading attacks on white settlements in western New York
and Pennsylvania. He later helped negotiate treaties that ceded large tracts
of Indian land to the U.S. He earned the enmity of his tribe after advo-
cating Indian nonresistance to white expansion and accepting a land grant
from Pennsylvania.
Cornwall Administrative (pop., 2001: 501,267, including the Isles of
SCILLY) and historic county, southwestern England. Located on a peninsula
jutting into the Atlantic Ocean and terminating in LAND’S END, it is the most
remote of English counties; its county seat is TRURO. Southern Cornwall
is a popular tourist area; much of the coast is now protected by the
National Trust. Tin, mined in Cornwall for at least 3,000 years, attracted
prehistoric settlers, and there are stone relics in the area. Since 1337 the
manors of Cornwall have belonged to the English sovereign’s eldest son,
who acts as duke of Cornwall.
Cornwallis, Charles Cornwallis, 1st Marquess and 2nd
Earl (b. Dec. 31, 1738, London,
Eng.—d. Oct. 5, 1805, Ghazipur,
India) British soldier and statesman.
In 1780, during the AMERICAN REVOLU-
TION, he was appointed British com-
mander in the American South. He
defeated HORATIO GATES at Camden,
S.C., then marched into Virginia and
encamped at Yorktown (see Siege of
YORKTOWN). Trapped and besieged
there, he was forced to surrender his
army (1781), a defeat that effectively
ended military operations in the war.
Despite his defeat, he
retained
esteem in England. As governor-
general of India (1786–93, 1805), he
introduced legal and administrative
reforms; the Cornwallis Code (1793)
established a tradition of incorrupt-
ible British civil servants. In the third
Mysore War he defeated Tippu Sul-
tan in 1792. As viceroy of Ireland
(1798–1801), he supported the parliamentary union of Britain and Ireland.
He negotiated the Anglo-French TREATY OF AMIENS in 1802. Reappointed
governor-general of India in 1805, he died shortly after his arrival there.
corona
BUSINESS FINANCE.
taxes. See also CAPITAL GAINS TAX; INCOME TAX.
MULTINATIONAL CORPORATION.
Corporation for Public Broadcasting See PBS
Correggio
Corsica
Cosimo, Piero di See PIERO DI COSIMO
Cosimo the Elder See Cosimo de’ MEDICI
cosine See TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTION
Cosmati
America. Area: 19,730 sq mi (51,100 sq km). Population (2005 est.):
4,221,000. Capital: SAN JOSÉ. Most of the people are of Spanish ancestry
Costa-Gavras
Cotonou
count or earl European title of nobility, ranking in modern times
directly below a MARQUESS or (in countries without marquesses) a DUKE. In
England the title of earl is the equivalent of count and ranks above a VIS-
COUNT. The wife of a count or earl is a countess. The Roman comes
(“count”) was originally a household companion of the emperor; under
the Franks he was a local commander and judge. The counts were later
incorporated into the feudal structure, some becoming subordinate to
dukes, though a few countships were as great as duchies. As royal author-
ity was reasserted over the feudatories, which took place at different times
in the different kingdoms, the counts lost their political authority, though
they retained their privileges as members of the nobility.
Counter-Reformation or Catholic Reformation In ROMAN
NERI, JOHN OF THE CROSS, TERESA OF ÁVILA, FRANCIS DE SALES, and VINCENT DE
country dance or contredanse
courante
Cousteau
BEANS.
Cowper
through the continental U.S. and Mexico to Central America. It weighs
about 20–50 lbs (9–23 kg) and is about 3–4 ft (1–1.3 m) long, including
its 12–16-in. (30–40-cm) tail. Its coarse fur is generally buff above and
whitish below; its legs are reddish, and its tail is bushy and black-tipped.
The coyote feeds mainly on small mammals such as rodents, rabbits, and
hares but can also take down deer, sometimes doing so in packs. Vegeta-
tion and carrion are commonly eaten as well. Though persecuted by
humans because of its potential (generally overstated) to prey on domes-
tic or game animals, it has adapted well to human-dominated environ-
ments, including urban areas. A coyote-dog cross is called a coydog.
coypu See NUTRIA
Coysevox
Cranach
crannog
(see BATTERSEA ENAMELWARE) were com-
patible with his cream-glazed prod-
ucts. By 1790 many other factories
(e.g., Liverpool, Bristol, Stafford-
shire) were producing creamware
with success; continental imitations
were generally inferior. Creamware
was continually made throughout the
19th century and later.
creation myth or cosmogony
the material, and the DEFORMATION over a period of time (creep strain) under
constant load is measured, usually with an extensometer or STRAIN GAUGE.
Time to failure is also measured against stress. Once creep strain versus
time is plotted, various mathematical techniques are available for extrapo-
lating creep behaviour beyond the test times; thus, designers can use
thousand-hour test data, for example, to predict ten-thousand-hour behav-
iour. See also TESTING MACHINE.
creosote
creditor See DEBTOR AND CREDITOR
include the THIRTEEN PRINCIPLES OF FAITH. In CHRISTIANITY the NICENE CREED was
Creston, Paul orig. Giuseppe Guttoveggio (b. Oct. 10, 1906,
New York, N.Y., U.S.—d. Aug. 24, 1985, San Diego, Calif.) U.S. com-
poser. Born to a poor immigrant family, he was largely self-taught in
music. His numerous works, many of which achieved wide performance,
are highly rhythmical and tonally accessible. They include six sympho-
nies, a Requiem and three masses, and several concertos. He is noted for
the rhythmic vitality and full harmonies of his music, which is marked
by modern dissonances and polyrhythms.
Cretaceous
Crispi
Croce
throw the government. It subsequently lost prestige and was dissolved by
the Popular Front government in 1936.
Cro-Magnon
cordage and textiles (e.g., cotton, hemp); oil crops, for consumption or
industrial uses (e.g., cottonseed, corn); ornamental crops, for landscape
gardening (e.g., dogwood, azalea); and industrial and secondary crops,
for various personal and industrial uses (e.g., rubber, tobacco).
crop duster Usually, an aircraft used for dusting or spraying large
acreages with PESTICIDES, though other types of dusters are also employed.
Aerial spraying and dusting permit prompt coverage of large areas at the
moment when application of pesticide is most effective and avoid the need
for wheeled vehicles that might damage crops. The technique was greatly
improved in the 1960s with the development of ultra-low-volume appli-
cators, in which concentrated pesticides are distributed in extremely small
amounts. See also SPRAYING AND DUSTING.
croquet
croton
crustacean
Cruise, Tom orig. Thomas
Cruise Mapother IV (b. July 3,
Crusade, Children’s See CHILDREN’S CRUSADE
Crusade, Stedinger See STEDINGER CRUSADE
cryogenics
Ctesibius
but by Nature.” See also INTUITIONISM; VOLUNTARISM.
Cuéllar, Javier Pérez de See Javier PEREZ DE CUELLAR
Cuernavaca
Cumae
Cultivation System or Culture System Revenue system in the
ety. See also CULTURE CONTACT; SOCIOCULTURAL EVOLUTION.
culture, pure See PURE CULTURE
Cumbria alternated between Scottish and English rule until it was taken
by the English in 1157. Lead, silver, and iron ore have been mined in the
district since the 12th century.
cumin
Curaçao
496 I
curling (cid:2) Curtis Institute of Music
curling Game in which two teams of four players each slide a round
stone by means of a gooseneck handle on the top over a 138-ft (42-m)
stretch of ice toward a target circle. The object is to deliver the stone clos-
est to the centre (called the house). Each player delivers two stones, which
average 40 lbs (18.1 kg) apiece, often applying a curl to the stone’s tra-
jectory. The player’s teammates use a broom to sweep the ice ahead of
the oncoming stone in order to facilitate a longer slide or to adjust the arc
of the curl. Blocking and knocking out an opponent’s stones are impor-
tant strategies of the sport. Curling originated in Scotland in the early 16th
century. World championships have been held since 1959 and are usually
dominated by Canadians and Scandinavians. In 1998 curling became a
medal sport in the Winter Olympic Games.
The British women’s curling team competing in the final match at the 2002 Winter
Olympics in Salt Lake City, Utah.
ROBERTO SCHMIDT—AFP/GETTY IMAGES
WALTER CHANDOHA
Currant (Ribes)
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Currier and Ives partnership of Nathaniel Currier and James
Curtis, Cyrus (Herman Kotzschmar) (b. June 18, 1850, Portland,
wife of the editor EDWARD BOK, and named for her father, the inventor
CHARLES GORDON CURTIS. Her endowment was adequate to assure scholar-
ships for gifted students throughout the world. Many eminent musicians
have served on its faculty, including WANDA LANDOWSKA, BOHUSLAV MAR-
TIN,, and RUDOLF SERKIN. Graduates include SAMUEL BARBER, LEONARD BERNSTEIN,
and GIAN CARLO MENOTTI.
Curtiz
also CULTURE; FOLKLORE; MYTH; TABOO.
customs duty See TARIFF
customs union Trade agreement by which a group of countries charges
a common set of TARIFFs to the rest of the world while allowing free trade
among themselves. It is a partial form of economic integration, interme-
diate between free-trade zones, which allow mutual FREE TRADE but lack a
common tariff system, and common markets, which both utilize common
tariffs and allow free movement of resources including capital and labour
between members. Well-known customs unions include the Zollverein, a
19th-century organization formed by several German states under Prus-
sian leadership, and the EUROPEAN UNION, which passed through a customs-
union stage on the path to fuller economic integration. See also European
Community; GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE; NORTH AMERICAN FREE
TRADE AGREEMENT; WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION.
Custoza
atmosphere. The Italianate style favoured in Utrecht, one of Holland’s
artistic centres, is evident in his work. Many of his surviving paintings
are signed but few are dated.
Cuyuni
there were three Cyclopes (Arges, Brontes, and Steropes) who forged
thunderbolts for ZEUS. In a later tradition, they were assistants to HEPHAES-
TUS in this task. Apollo destroyed them after one of their thunderbolts
killed ASCLEPIUS.
cyclotron
Cypselus
Moravian Corridor, separates the Bohemian Massif from the CARPATHIAN
MOUNTAINS. Woodlands are a characteristic feature of the Czech landscape;
most regions have a moderate oceanic climate. The economy has been
privatized since the collapse of communism and is now largely market-
oriented. The Czech Republic is a multiparty republic with two legisla-
tive houses; its chief of state is the president, and the head of government
is the prime minister. Until 1918 its history was largely that of BOHEMIA.
In that year the independent republic of Czechoslovakia was born through
the union of Bohemia and MORAVIA with SLOVAKIA. Czechoslovakia came
under the domination of the Soviet Union after World War II, and from
1948 to 1989 it was ruled by a communist government. Its growing politi-
cal liberalization was suppressed by a Soviet invasion in 1968 (see PRA-
GUE SPRING). After communist rule collapsed in 1989–90, separatist
sentiments emerged among the Slovaks, and in 1992 the Czechs and Slo-
vaks agreed to break up their federated state. At midnight on Dec. 31,
1992, Czechoslovakia was peacefully dissolved and replaced by two new
countries, the Czech Republic and Slovakia, with the region of Moravia
remaining in the former. In 1999 the Czech Republic joined NATO, and
in 2004 it became a member of the European Union.
Czerny
tenths of
the population; Slovaks and
Moravians are the largest minorities. Lan-
guage: Czech (official). Religion: Chris-
tianity (predominantly Roman Catholic,
also other Christians, Protestant). Cur-
rency: koruna. The landlocked country is dominated by the Bohemian
Massif, a ring of mountains rising to 5,256 ft (1,602 m) at Mount Snezka
to encircle the Bohemian Plateau. The MORAVA RIVER valley, known as the
da Gama, Vasco See Vasco da GAMA
Da Ponte
Daidalic sculpture See DAEDALIC
SCULPTURE
Daigak Guksa
a modern communication and trans-
portation system and instituted social
reforms. He left India in 1856, but
his controversial policy of annex-
ation was considered a contributing
factor to the INDIAN MUTINY (1857).
Dalhousie University Privately
endowed university in Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada. It was founded in
1818 as Dalhousie College by the 9th
earl of Dalhousie,
then lieutenant
governor of Nova Scotia,
became a university in 1863. It is
organized into faculties of arts, sci-
ence, management,
architecture,
engineering, computer science, law,
medicine, dentistry, health profes-
sions, and graduate studies.
Dalton brothers U.S. outlaws.
Probably born in Cass Co., Mo., they
worked as cowboys in Oklahoma but
by 1889 had become horse thieves.
In 1890–91 they robbed gambling
houses, trains, and banks. In 1892
Bob, Grat, and Emmett Dalton and
two other gang members rode into
Coffeyville, Kan., to robits banks;
they were recognized, and vigilante
citizens killed all but Emmett, who
was wounded and sent to prison for
14 years. The fourth brother, Bill, had returned to Oklahoma before the
raid; he later formed his own gang, and was shot by lawmen in 1894 while
playing with his daughter.
Daly River
Dandolo
Danton
Dardanelles
criminal lawyer. He represented striking Pennsylvania coal miners, draw-
ing attention to working conditions and the use of CHILD LABOUR (1902–03);
secured the acquittal of WILLIAM HAYWOOD in the assassination of Gov.
Frank R. Steunenberg of Idaho (1907); and sought
to defend the
McNamara brothers, accused of bombing the Los Angeles Times building
(1911). He saved Richard Loeb and Nathan Leopold from a death sen-
tence for the murder of 14-year-old Robert Franks and won acquittal for
members of an African American family who had fought a mob trying to
expel them from their home in a white Detroit neighbourhood (1925–26).
Perhaps his most famous case was the SCOPES TRIAL (1925), in which he
defended a high school teacher who was charged with violating a Ten-
nessee state law against teaching Darwin’s theory of evolution.
darshan or darsan
database management system (DBMS) System for quick search
Date Line See INTERNATIONAL DATE LINE
also FISSION-TRACK DATING; HELIUM DATING; LEAD-210 DATING; RUBIDIUM-STRONTIUM
DATING; URANIUM-234–URANIUM-238 DATING; URANIUM-THORIUM-LEAD DATING.
Daubenton
NOLOGY; CABLE MODEM; DSL; ISDN; FAX; RADIO; TELETYPE; T1; WIRELESS COMMU-
NICATIONS.
story collection Monday Tales (1873), the play L’Arlésienne (1872), the
novels The Nabob (1877) and Sappho (1884), and several volumes of
memoirs. His son, Léon Daudet (1867–1942), edited with CHARLES MAU-
RRAS the reactionary review L’Action Française and was a virulent sati-
rist and polemicist on the subjects of medicine and psychology as well
as public affairs.
Daughters of the American Revolution (DAR) U.S. patriotic
society for direct descendants of soldiers or others who aided the cause of
independence. It was organized in 1890 and chartered by Congress in 1895.
Its historical division stresses the study of U.S. history and preservation of
Americana. Its educational division provides scholarships and loans, helps
support schools for underprivileged youth and for Americanization train-
ing, sponsors prizes, and publishes manuals. Its patriotic division publishes
the Daughters of the American Revolution Magazine and The National
Defense News. It was long known for its conservatism; its refusal in 1939
to let the black singer MARIAN ANDERSON perform at Washington’s Consti-
tution Hall led to her famous concert at the Lincoln Memorial.
Daumier
became the city’s leading painter after the death of HANS MEMLING. Most
of his works are altarpieces and other panels featuring traditional religious
themes, but his best-known paintings, The Judgment of Cambyses and The
Flaying of Sisamnes (1498), deal with the theme of justice; they origi-
nally hung in the town hall of Bruges. His works are among the earliest
Flemish paintings to feature the Italian Renaissance iconography of putti
(male child angels) and garlands.
David
Davos
SIBELIUS.
Commission and arranged the DAWES PLAN. He served as vice president
(1925–29) under CALVIN COOLIDGE. He shared the 1925 Nobel Prize for
Peace with Sir AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN.
Dawes General Allotment Act or Dawes Severalty Act
YOUNG PLAN.
dawn redwood Coniferous, nonevergreen tree (Metasequoia glyp-
tostroboides), the only living species of the genus Metasequoia, of the
family Taxodiaceae, native to remote valleys of central China. Both
branchlets and leaves grow out in pairs from points along the stem. The
bright green, feathery leaves turn reddish brown in autumn. Though
Metasequoia fossils are abundant, the tree was thought to be extinct until
living specimens were discovered in the 1940s. Only a few thousand are
known to have survived, in central China. Since these stands were dis-
covered, seeds and cuttings have been planted throughout the world.
Dawson, George Geoffrey orig. George Geoffrey Robin-
Daxue
Dayak
development. Though embittered, he was widely honoured as the father
of radio and the grandfather of television.
De Gasperi
he advocated and who favoured more violent tactics. He then created the
unsuccessful Workers’ International Industrial Union.
de Man
Debrecen
possible outcomes for each experiment, giving information about the state
of affairs preparatory to making a decision; a set of available acts depend-
ing on the experiments made and their consequences; and a set of pos-
sible consequences of the acts, in which each possible act assigns to each
possible initial state some particular consequence. The problem is dealt
with by assessing probabilities of consequences conditional on different
choices of experiments and acts and by assigning a utility function to the
set of consequences according to some scheme of value or preference of
the decision maker. An optimal solution consists of an optimal decision
function, which assigns to each possible experiment an optimal act that
maximizes the utility, or value, and a choice of an optimal experiment.
See also COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS, GAME THEOR Y.
Decius
deciduous tree Broad-leaved tree that sheds all its leaves during one
season. Deciduous forests are found in three middle-latitude regions with
a temperate climate characterized by a winter season and year-round pre-
cipitation: eastern North America, western Eurasia, and northeastern Asia.
They also extend into more arid regions along stream banks and around
bodies of water. OAKS, BEECHES, BIRCHES, CHESTNUTS, ASPENS, ELMS, MAPLES, and
gave up its North African colonies by 1962. Portugal gave up its African
colonies in the 1970s; Macau was returned to the Chinese in 1999.
decompression chamber See HYPERBARIC CHAMBER
decompression sickness also called the bends or caisson dis-
also POSTMODERNISM; POSTSTRUCTURALISM.
Decoration Day See MEMORIAL DAY
decorative arts Arts concerned with the design and decoration of
objects that are utilitarian rather than purely aesthetic, including CERAMICS,
glassware, BASKETR Y, JEWELR Y, METALWORK, FURNITURE, and TEXTILES. The separa-
FORMAL AND INFORMAL).
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
decompression chamber (cid:2) defamation
BOU, ELK, MULE DEER, MUNTJAC, RED DEER, ROE DEER, WHITE-TAILED DEER.
Rival European red deer stags (Cervus elaphus) fighting for possession of a hind in
the rutting season.
STEFAN MEYERS GDT/ARDEA LONDON
deer mouse or white-footed mouse Any of about 60 species
defecation
Deinarchus See DINARCHUS
Deinonychus
Delaunay
Deleuze
blue ground. Andrea (di Marco) Della Robbia (1435–1525), Luca’s
nephew, assumed control of the workshop c. 1470. Trained as a marble
sculptor, his best-known works are ten roundels of infants on the facade
of Florence’s Foundling Hospital (c. 1487). Giovanni Della Robbia
(1469–1529), the most distinguished of Andrea’s sons, took control of the
family workshop after his father’s death. His early works, notably a lavabo
in Santa Maria Novella (1497) and medallions in the Loggia of San Paolo
(1493–95), were collaborations with his father.
dell’Abbate, Niccolo See Niccolo dell’ABBATE
Delmarva Peninsula Peninsula, eastern U.S. Extending between
CHESAPEAKE and DELAWARE bays, it is about 180 mi (290 km) long and up
to 70 mi (110 km) wide. Encompassing parts of the states of Delaware,
Maryland, and Virginia—hence its name—it includes Maryland’s Eastern
Shore. Fishing and tourism are economically important to the area.
Delors
Democratic Republic of the Congo See Democratic Republic of
the CONGO
Democrats of the Left (DS) formerly (1921–91) Italian Commu-
nist Party (1991–98) Democratic Party of the Left Major Italian
political party. Founded as the Partito Comunista Italiano (PCI) in 1921
by dissidents of the ITALIAN SOCIALIST PARTY’s left wing, it was outlawed with
other political parties by BENITO MUSSOLINI’s fascist government in 1926
and went underground. It participated in the Italian Resistance in World
War II. After the war it joined in coalition governments and was consis-
tently successful at the polls. In 1956, after the crimes of JOSEPH STALIN
were revealed, PALMIRO TOGLIATTI tried to dissociate the PCI from the Soviet
Union. ENRICO BERLINGUER, as party leader from 1972 to 1984, became the
leading proponent of EUROCOMMUNISM. In order to consolidate left-wing
forces and broaden its base, the party changed its name to Democratic
Party of the Left in 1991; it became one of Italy’s largest political parties
and western Europe’s largest communist party. In 1998 it renamed itself
Democrats of the Left.
Democritus
demurrer
metre (kg/m3). The expression “particle density” refers to the number of
particles per unit volume, not to the density of a single particle. See also
SPECIFIC GRAVITY.
D’Entrecasteaux
“Do not bear false witness.” The most important exponent of deontolog-
ical ethics is IMMANUEL KANT. See also CATEGORICAL IMPERATIVE.
Depardieu
dermatitis or eczema
also used. All are energy-intensive and therefore expensive. Currently,
more than 2 billion gallons (8 million cu m) of fresh water are produced
each day by several thousand desalination plants throughout the world,
the largest plants being in the Arabian Peninsula.
Descartes
17th century, the name was often used for two quite distinct areas. Gaelic
Desmond extended over part of modern Counties Kerry and Cork; Anglo-
Norman Desmond extended over northern Kerry, most of the modern
county of Limerick, southwestern Tipperary, eastern and southern County
Cork, and eastern Waterford.
Desmoulins
deuterium oxide See HEAVY WATER
Deuteronomic Reform
nephew, Karl August Devrient (1797–1872), acted in Dresden, Karlsruhe,
and principally Hannover (1839–72), where he was popular in plays by
Shakespeare, Goethe, and Schiller. Karl’s brother Eduard (1801–77)
began his career as an opera singer, then worked as an actor and stage
director in Dresden (1844–52) and Karlsruhe (1852–70), where he
directed German classics and made new translations of Shakespeare’s
plays. Karl’s other brother, Emil (1803–72), made his stage debut in 1821
and acted with the Dresden court theatre (1831–68); his greatest successes
were as Hamlet and as Goethe’s Tasso. Eduard’s son Otto (1838–94) acted
in various companies, then became a director in Karlsruhe and other Ger-
man cities. In Weimar he produced his own version of Goethe’s Faust
(1876); he also wrote several tragedies. Karl’s son Max (1857–1929)
made his debut in Dresden in 1878 and in 1882 joined the famed Vienna
Burgtheater.
dew Deposit of water droplets formed at night by the condensation of
water vapour from the air onto the surfaces of exposed objects. Dew forms
on clear nights, when exposed surfaces lose heat by radiation and are thus
usually colder than the air. The cold surface cools the air in its vicinity,
and, if the air is humid enough, it may cool below its dew point, the tem-
perature at which water vapour condenses out of the air onto the surface.
See also FROST.
Dewar
the country’s leading industrial cen-
Its historic buildings include
temples, churches, and more than
700 mosques, some of which date to
the 15th century.
dialysis
Diderot
dicot See COTYLEDON, FLOWERING PLANT
Didyma
NUTRITION and are most effective combined with exercise. Appetite sup-
pressants may have dangerous side effects. Excessive weight loss may be
a sign of ANOREXIA NERVOSA.
Dietrich
See also ANALOG COMPUTER.
Digital Subscriber Line See DSL
digital-to-analog conversion (DAC) Process by which digital sig-
digital video disk See DVD
digitalis
Dilke
Dimitrov
Diocletian
Lucien Lelong. In 1947 he introduced his revolutionary “New Look,”
which featured small shoulders, a natural waistline, and a voluminous
skirt, a drastic change from the World War II look of padded shoulders
and short skirts. In the 1950s the “sack,” or “H” line, became the char-
acteristic silhouette of his designs. He was instrumental in commercial-
izing Parisian fashion on a worldwide scale.
diorite
recording. See also ACTOR-MANAGER SYSTEM; AUTEUR THEOR Y.
Directoire style
essary to chase intruders from a territory or for animals to injure each
other in competition for mates. One type of defensive display deceives
predators or lures them away from vulnerable young. See also BIRDSONG;
COURTSHIP BEHAVIOUR.
used for CONSUMPTION or SAVING.
Dispur
hands. From 17th-century England, the word distaff became a synonym
for maternal as most spinning was done by women in their homes. See
also DOMESTIC SYSTEM.
distribution See FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION, NORMAL DISTRIBUTION
the products. See also ASSOCIATIVE LAW; COMMUTATIVE LAW.
District Court, U.S. See UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
District of Columbia Federal district of the U.S. Coextensive with the
city of WASHINGTON, it is bounded by Maryland and Virginia. Originally
100 sq mi (259 sq km), the territory was authorized by Congress in 1790
and granted by Maryland and Virginia; it now occupies 68 sq mi (176 sq
km). The site was chosen by Pres. GEORGE WASHINGTON and became the
seat of the federal government by 1800. Part of the district (ALEXANDRIA,
Va.) was retroceded to Virginia in 1847. The slave trade was prohibited
in the District in 1850 and slavery was abolished in 1862. The territorial
government was abolished in 1874 in favour of government by a com-
mission appointed by the president. Residents were granted suffrage in
national elections in 1961 by the 23rd Amendment to the U.S. CONSTITU-
TION. The mayor-council form of government was established in 1967.
Originally appointees of the president, the mayor and councilors became
elected officials in 1973 and received local legislative powers in 1974.
dithyramb
AQUAVIT; BRANDY; GIN; LIQUEUR; RUM; VODKA; and WHISKEY.
divertimento
pioneers of jazz, although many critics of popular music believe the term
better describes the music of a later wave of white Chicago musicians
including Jimmy McPartland, Bud Freeman, and Frank Teschemacher.
The earliest jazz ensembles grew out of the RAGTIME and brass bands of
New Orleans, incorporating elements of the BLUES. In early jazz ensembles,
such as those led by KING OLIVER and JELLY ROLL MORTON, the trumpet or
cornet plays the melody, with clarinet and trombone providing accompa-
niment. The tension created by soloists contrasts with the release of
ensemble refrains. It is played with a distinctive two-beat rhythm, result-
ing in ajoyous cacophony at fast tempos or slow, mournful dirges. Dix-
ieland groups usually include banjo, tuba, and drums.
Dixon, Joseph (b. Jan. 18, 1799, Marblehead, Mass., U.S.—d. June
15, 1869, Jersey City, N.J.) U.S. inventor and manufacturer. Largely self-
taught, Dixon began his pioneering industrial use of GRAPHITE in 1827 with
the manufacture of lead pencils, stove polish, and lubricants. He discov-
ered that graphite crucibles withstood high temperatures, and he secured
patents on graphite crucibles for making steel and pottery. He established
a crucible steelworks in Jersey City in 1850. He also experimented with
photography and photolithography and devised a technique for printing
banknotes in colour to prevent counterfeiting.
Dixon, Willie orig. William James Dixon (b. July 1, 1915, Vicks-
Djakarta See JAKARTA
Djibouti
Dnieper River
Doctors Without Borders French Médecins Sans Frontières
Dog Star See SIRIUS
Dollar Diplomacy U.S. foreign
Dollfuss
Dombrowska, Maria See Maria D/BROWSKA
Dome of the Rock or Mosque of Omar Oldest existing Islamic
Domenichino
Dominica
tic service has declined in the U.S. and Europe since the early 1920s, a trend
attributed to the leveling of social classes, greater job opportunities for
women, and the spread of labour-saving household devices.
domestic system or putting-out system Production system wide-
RIK IBSEN. GERHART HAUPTMANN, EUGENE O’NEILL, and ARTHUR MILLER wrote
Domingo, Plácido (b. Jan. 21,
1941, Madrid, Spain) Spanish tenor
and conductor. He moved to Mexico
in 1949 with his parents, both of
whom were ZARZUELA (a form of Span-
ish light opera) singers. He studied
voice, piano, and conducting, mak-
ing his debut as a baritone. After
developing his tenor range, he made
his U.S. debut, spent three years in
Tel Aviv (singing in Hebrew), came
to the New York City Opera in 1965,
and debuted with the Metropolitan
Opera at Lewissohn Stadium in
1966. His resonant, powerful voice,
imposing physical
stature, good
looks, and dramatic ability made him
one of the most popular tenors of the
second half of the 20th century.
Dominic, Saint orig. Domingo
de Guzmán (b. 1170, Caleruega,
Castile—d. Aug. 6, 1221, Bologna,
Romagna; canonized July 3, 1234;
feast day August 8) Founder of the
Domitian
late 1940s. DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER, JOHN F. KENNEDY, and LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Portuguese power in the colony. Each donatário received a portion of land
and was charged with recruiting and protecting settlers and promoting
agriculture and commerce. At one time Brazil’s viability as a colony
depended on the success of the donatários, but by 1754 all the captain-
cies had been abolished.
Donatello
Dong Thap Muoi See Plain of REEDS
Dong Zhongshu
Garden (1916), Hymen (1921), and Red Roses for Bronze (1929). She was
also acclaimed for her translations, verse drama, and prose works.
Doolittle, Jimmy orig. James Harold Doolittle (b. Dec. 14, 1896,
Alameda, Calif., U.S.—d. Sept. 27, 1993, Pebble Beach, Calif.) U.S. gen-
eral. He enlisted in the army in World War I and became an aviator. After
the war he earned a Ph.D. in engineering and remained in the Army Air
Corps as a test pilot until 1930, when he became head of aviation for
Shell Oil Co. In 1932 he set a world air speed record. Returning to active
duty during World War II, he led a daring raid on Tokyo (1942), for which
he received the Congressional Medal of Honor. He commanded air opera-
tions on many fronts, including attacks on Germany in 1944–45. After the
war he remained active in the aerospace industry. He received the Presi-
dential Medal of Freedom in 1989.
door Movable barrier installed in the entry of a room or building to
restrict access or provide visual privacy. Early doors were hides or tex-
tiles. With monumental architecture came pivoting doors of rigid, perma-
nent materials; important chambers often had stone or bronze doors.
Pompeiian doors looked much like modern wooden doors; they were
constructed of stiles (vertical planks) and rails (horizontal planks) fastened
together to support panels and occasionally equipped with locks and
hinges. The typical Western medieval door was of vertical planks backed
with horizontal or diagonal bracing. In the 20th century, a single, hollow-
core panel door became most common. Other types include the revolv-
ing door, folding door, sliding door (inspired by the Japanese SHOJI), rolling
door, and Dutch door (divided horizontally so that the lower or upper part
can be opened separately).
Door Peninsula Peninsula, northeastern Wisconsin, U.S. Located
between GREEN BAY and Lake MICHIGAN, it was named for a strait atits tip
known as La Porte des Mortes (“Death’s Door”). About 80 mi (130 km)
long and 25 mi (40 km) wide at its base, the peninsula was visited in the
17th century by French traders and missionaries. It is now a year-round
vacation area, and tourism is a major business. The whole peninsula is
popularly known as Door County, though Door is but one of four coun-
ties on the peninsula.
dopamine
dormer Window set vertically in a structure that projects from a slop-
ing roof. It often illuminates a bedroom. In the late Gothic and early
Renaissance periods, elaborate masonry dormers were designed. Dormers
were used along with the mansard ROOF to defy a Parisian law limiting
buildings to six stories; the seventh story was called a garret (or attic) and
was made habitable by the dormer. See also GABLE.
dormouse Any of 20 RODENT species (family Gliridae) found through-
out Eurasia and northern Africa.
Dormice have large eyes, soft fur,
rounded ears, and a hairy (sometimes
bushy)
tail. They live in trees,
bushes, and rock walls and in nests
of plant material. They eat fruit, nuts,
birds’ eggs, and some insects and
small animals. Many species sleep
for long periods, particularly in win-
ter. The largest species, the edible
dormouse (Glis glis),
is gray and
attains a maximum length of about 8
in. (20 cm), excluding the 6-in. (15-
cm) tail.
Dornberger
of the ACCUSED; DUE PROCESS.
double refraction or birefringence Optical property in which a
single ray of unpolarized light (see POLARIZATION) splits into two compo-
nents traveling at different velocities and in different directions. One ray
is refracted (see REFRACTION) at an angle as it travels through the medium,
while the other passes through unchanged. The splitting occurs because
the speed of the ray through the medium is determined by the orientation
of the light compared with the CR YSTAL LATTICE of the medium. Since unpo-
larized light consists of waves that vibrate in all directions, some will pass
through the lattice without being affected, while others will be refracted
and change direction. Materials that exhibit double refraction include ICE,
QUARTZ, and SUGAR.
ALEXANDER CARTWRIGHT.
Doubs River
Douglas-Home
Down syndrome or trisomy
draft See BILL OF EXCHANGE
draft See CONSCRIPTION
LINE.
Drake equation or Green Bank equation Equation claimed to
Drakensberg
m) and extends from southwest to northeast in LESOTHO and southeastern
South Africa, separating the extensive high plateaus of the interior from
the lower lands along the coast. It is an area of many game reserves and
national parks.
Draper, Charles Stark (b. Oct. 2, 1901, Windsor, Mo., U.S.—d. July
25, 1987, Cambridge, Mass.) U.S. aeronautical engineer. He taught at MIT
from 1935, where he developed a gunsight for naval ANTI-AIRCRAFT GUNS
that was installed on most U.S. naval vessels in World War II. His iner-
tial guidance system, called spatial inertial reference equipment (SPIRE),
allowed planes, submarines, and ballistic missiles to travel thousands of
miles to their destinations without reference to outside navigational aids,
such as radio or the positions of celestial bodies. His group at the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology also developed guidance systems for
the APOLLO program. He is memorialized in the annual Charles Stark
Draper Prize for achievement in engineering.
Draper, Ruth (b. Dec. 2, 1884, New York, N.Y., U.S.—d. Dec. 30, 1956,
New York City) U.S. monologist. She began her career by writing dramatic
sketches about people she had observed and performing them at parties.
She made her New York debut (1917) in a series of one-act pieces. Her
London debut (1920) established her as a master monologist. She per-
formed worldwide, playing on a bare stage with few props and creating
characters and settings by subtle modulation of feature, gesture, and voice.
Drau River See DRAVA RIVER
Drava River
Dresden Codex Latin Codex Dresdensis One of the few pre-
dressage
up its errors in making the case. After a new court-martial (1899) again
found Dreyfus guilty, he was pardoned by the president of the republic in
an effort to resolve the issue. In 1906 a civilian court of appeals cleared
Dreyfus and reversed all previous convictions. Formally reinstated and
decorated with the Legion of Honor, he later saw active service in World
War I. The affair resulted in the separation of church and state in 1905.
Dreyfuss
drupe Fruit
MANGO, OLIVE, and WALNUT.
Drury Lane Theatre Oldest
English theatre still in use. It was
built in London by Thomas Killi-
grew for his acting company as the
Theatre Royal (1663). It burned in
1672 and was rebuilt in 1674 with
CHRISTOPHER WREN as architect. It prospered under such actor-managers as
COLLEY CIBBER and later under DAVID GARRICK and RICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN.
Drusus Germanicus
illegal drugs also have medical uses (see COCAINE; HEROIN; DRUG ADDICTION).
See also DRUG RESISTANCE; PHARMACOLOGY; PHARMACY.
drug addiction or chemical dependency Physical and/or psy-
addictions are to alcohol (see ALCOHOLISM), BARBITURATES, TRANQUILIZERS, and
drug poisoning or medicinal poisoning Harmful effects of
Dry Tortugas
(metaphysical dualism); also, any theory that employs dualisms.
Examples of epistemological dualisms are subject and object and sensa-
tion and sensibilia; examples of metaphysical dualisms are mind and mat-
ter, good and evil, and God and world. Dualism is distinguished from
MONISM and PLURALISM.
Dubayy or Dubai
duck hawk See PEREGRINE FALCON
ductus arteriosus
Dujardin
Dumfries
one roof, are a focal point in the modern city centre. Dundee was a world
centre for jute manufacturing in the 19th century. Textiles are still pro-
duced, but since World War II light engineering has become the predomi-
nant industry. The University of Dundee was founded in 1881.
dune See SAND DUNE
dung beetle Any member of one subfamily (Scarabaeinae) of SCARAB
BEETLES, which shapes manure into a ball (sometimes as large as an apple)
with its scooperlike head and paddle-shaped antennae. They vary from
0.2 to more than 1 in. (5–30 mm) long. In early summer it buries itself
and the ball and feeds on it. Later in the season the female deposits eggs
in dung balls, on which the larvae will later feed. They are usually round
with short wing covers (elytra) that expose the end of the abdomen. They
can eat more than their own weight in 24 hours and are considered help-
ful because they hasten the conversion of manure to substances usable by
other organisms.
Dungannon
DuPont Co. in full E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co. U.S. chemi-
Dupuytren
Durga-puja
Duryea
Duvalier
as the absorbent, and sodium nitrate was added as an oxidizing agent to
increase the strength of the explosive.
dysentery
E. coli
CHRISTUS, DIRCK BOUTS, HUGO VAN DER GOES, and HANS MEMLING.
588 I
Earth impact hazard (cid:2) East
1,000 Earth-crossing asteroids larger than 0.6 mi (1 km) may exist.
Impacts of 0.6-mi-size asteroids are believed to occur a few times every
million years. Such a collision would deliver the explosive force of sev-
eral HYDROGEN BOMBs, possibly resulting in global climate disturbances or
huge tidal waves. The impact of an object about 6 mi (10 km) in diam-
eter is thought to have caused a massive extinction of species, including
the DINOSAURs, at the end of the CRETACEOUS PERIOD.
Earth impact hazard The danger of collision with ASTEROIDS and COM-
ETS whose orbits carry them near EARTH. Space around Earth contains vast
numbers of objects in a range of sizes, but only the largest, which strike
very rarely on average, are thought to pose a great danger. Scientists
believe such an impact caused the mass EXTINCTION of DINOSAURS and other
species at the end of the CRETACEOUS PERIOD 65 million years ago. In addi-
tion to creating tremendous immediate destruction, a large impact could
throw great clouds of debris into the atmosphere, cutting off sunlight and
causing a prolonged temperature drop—an “impact winter” (similar to a
NUCLEAR WINTER) that would kill plant life and bring on worldwide famine.
The amount of damage depends primarily on the colliding object’s mass
and relative velocity. The energy released, expressed in millions of tons
(megatons) of TNT, falls between about 10 megatons and 1 billion mega-
tons, corresponding to objects roughly 160 ft (50 m) to 12 mi (20 km)
across. The last destructive impact known, the TUNGUSKA EVENT, occurred
over Siberia in 1908. Since the 1990s, search programs have scanned for
objects on possible collision courses. Should a collision appear likely,
nonexplosive projectiles or, in extreme cases, NUCLEAR WEAPONS might suc-
ceed in redirecting the object away from Earth.
ronment and Development Conference held in Rio de Janeiro
(June 3–14, 1992) to reconcile worldwide economic development with
environmental protection. It was the largest gathering of world leaders in
history, with 117 heads of state and representatives of 178 countries.
Biodiversity, GLOBAL WARMING, sustainable development, and preservation
of tropical rain forests were among the topics discussed. Five international
agreements were signed amid tensions between the industrialized coun-
tries of the North and the poorer developing states of the South, who were
reluctant to accept environmental restrictions without increased Northern
economic aid. Follow-up meetings were held in 1997 at the UN General
Assembly in New York and in 2002 in Johannesburg, S.Af. See also RIO
TREATY.
also CREAMWARE.
Lead-glazed earthenware water pot,
Paris, 15th century, in the National
Museum of Ceramics, Sèvres, France.
COURTESY OF THE MUSEE NATIONAL DE LA CERAMIQUE,
SEVRES
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Earthworm (Lumbricus terrestris).
Earthshine on the moon.
COURTESY OF YERKES OBSERVATORY, WISCONSIN
JOHN MARKHAM
REVOLUTION.
East Prussia German Ostpreussen
East African Rift System See GREAT RIFT VALLEY
LU XUN; MURASAKI SHIKIBU.
East China Sea See CHINA SEA
East India Co. or English East India Co. English CHARTERED COM-
PANY formed for trade with East and Southeast Asia and India, incorpo-
rated in 1600. It began as a monopolistic trading body, establishing early
trading stations at Surat, Madras (now CHENNAI), Bombay (MUMBAI), and
Calcutta (KOLKATA). Trade in spices was its original focus; this broadened
to include cotton, silk, and other goods. In 1708 it merged with a rival
found, as well as evidence of Roman occupation. The South Saxons came
to dominate the area, and they were in turn subjugated by WESSEX. In 1066
William of Normandy (see WILLIAM I) landed at Pevensey and fought the
Battle of HASTINGS. Along the coast, Hove, BRIGHTON, Peacehaven, Seaford,
Eastbourne, Bexhill, and Hastings form an ever-lengthening line of
resorts.
Country occupying the eastern half of the island of Timor, Southeast Asia.
Bounded by the Timor Sea and by the western half of TIMOR, it also
East-West Schism See SCHISM OF 1054
Easter Island Spanish Isla de Pascua native Rapa Nui
Ebbinghaus
land CREE, DELAWARE, FOX, HURON, Illinois, IROQUOIS, MOHICAN, MIAMI, MIC-
MAC, MOHAWK, MOHEGAN, MONTAGNAIS AND NASKAPI, OJIBWA, ONEIDA,
EB virus See EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS
useful when the required stroke of the reciprocating motion is small in
comparison with the dimensions of the driving shaft. Because an eccen-
tric can be attached anywhere along a shaft, it is unnecessary to form any
part of the shaft into a CRANK. Eccentrics are seldom used to transmit large
FORCES because FRICTION loss would be high; they are commonly used to
drive the valve gears of engines.
Eccles
singer and bandleader. Eckstine sang with EARL HINES’s big band (1939–
43), then formed his own band in 1944. Sympathetic with the new sounds
of BEBOP, Eckstine engaged many of its innovators, including DIZZY GILLESPIE,
CHARLIE PARKER, and SARAH VAUGHAN. Disbanding the group in 1947, he
achieved greater popular success as a solo performer, specializing in bal-
lads that featured his deep, resonant baritone. He was one of the greatest
interpreters of popular song and blues in jazz.
eclampsia See PREECLAMPSIA AND ECLAMPSIA
eclipsing variable star or eclipsing binary BINAR Y STAR in an orbit
ABLE STAR.
ecliptic
tal investment, research and development, and export strategies. See also
CAPITALISM, COMMUNISM, SOCIALISM, ZAIBATSU.
MATHEMATICS, POLITICAL SCIENCE, and SOCIOLOGY.
Economist, The Weekly magazine of news and opinion, founded in
1843 and published in London, generally regarded as one of the world’s
preeminent journals of its kind. It gives thorough and wide-ranging cov-
erage of general news and particularly of international political develop-
ments that bear on the world’s economy. In accord with the views
promoted by its founders and conveyed by legendary Economist editor
WALTER BAGEHOT, the publication maintains the position that free markets
typically provide the best method of running economies and governments.
North America accounts for about half of its total readership.
ecosystem
GROWTH.
and STRATIGRAPHY.
also ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
ecoterrorism or ecological terrorism or environmental ter-
ectopic pregnancy
Eddy, Mary Baker orig. Mary
edelweiss
Edgeworth-Kuiper belt See KUIPER BELT
Edinburgh
values and accumulated knowledge of a society. In developing cultures
there is often little formal education; children learn from their environ-
ment and activities, and the adults around them act as teachers. In more
complex societies, where there is more knowledge to be passed on, a more
selective and efficient means of transmission—the school and teacher—
becomes necessary. The content of formal education, its duration, and who
receives it have varied widely from culture to culture and age to age, as
has the philosophy of education. Some philosophers (e.g., JOHN LOCKE)
have seen individuals as blank slates onto which knowledge can be writ-
ten. Others (e.g., Jean-Jacques ROUSSEAU) have seen the innate human state
as desirable in itself and therefore to be tampered with as little as pos-
sible, a view often taken in alternative education. See also BEHAVIOURISM;
JOHN DEWEY; ELEMENTAR Y EDUCATION; HIGHER EDUCATION; KINDERGARTEN; LYCEUM
MOVEMENT; PROGRESSIVE EDUCATION; PUBLIC SCHOOL; SPECIAL EDUCATION; TEACHING.
cation include PLATO, JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU, and JOHN DEWEY.
SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY.
PARK and QUEEN ELIZABETH NATIONAL PARK. It was named by HENR Y MORTON
Edward II known as Edward of Caernarfon
efficiency or mechanical efficiency In mechanics, the measure of
the effectiveness with which a system performs. It is stated as the ratio
of a system’s WORK output to its work input. The efficiency of a real sys-
tem is always less than 1 because of FRICTION between moving parts. A
machine with an efficiency of 0.8 returns 80% of the work input as work
output; the remaining 20% is used to overcome friction. In a theoretically
frictionless, or ideal, machine, the work input and work output are equal,
and the efficiency would be 1, or 100%.
effigy mound Earthen mound in the form of a bird or animal (e.g,
bear, deer, turtle, buffalo), found in the northern central U.S., especially
the Ohio River valley. Little is known of the effigy mounds except that
most were burial sites. The culture that produced them dates from AD 300
to the mid-17th century. See also HOPEWELL CULTURE.
Effigy Mounds National Monument Archaeological site, north-
eastern Iowa, U.S. Located on the Mississippi River, it covers 4 sq mi (10
sq km). Established in 1949, the monument has 183 known mounds, some
of which are in the shape of birds and bears. The mounds were built over
the course of the Woodland period (1000 BC–AD 1200), with the effigy
mounds probably constructed between AD 400 and 1200. Many mounds
have yielded copper, bone, and stone tools of Indian origin. One of the
bear mounds is 137 ft (42 m) long and 3.5 ft (1 m) high.
eft See NEWT
Egas Moniz
Edwards, Blake orig. William Blake McEdwards (b. July 26,
Egill Skallagrímsson
Ehrenberg
seen at LUXOR, KARNAK, ABYDOS, and ABU SIMBEL.
Ehrenburg
Eijkman
Eisenstein
AMERICA. Area: 8,124 sq mi (21,042 sq km). Population (2005 est.):
6,881,000. Capital: SAN SALVADOR. The majority of the people are mesti-
Elagabalus
Elbrus
in some areas to ensure a fairer distribution of legislative seats to con-
stituencies that may be denied representation under the plurality or major-
ity formulas. See also PARTY SYSTEM, PLURALITY SYSTEM, PRIMAR Y ELECTION.
Electra In Greek legend, the daughter of AGAMEMNON and Clytemnestra.
When Agamemnon was murdered by Clytemnestra and her lover Aegis-
thus, Electra saved her young brother ORESTES from the same fate by send-
ing him away. Orestes later returned, and Electra helped him kill their
mother and Aegisthus. She then married her brother’s friend Pylades. The
story is treated in plays by AESCHYLUS, SOPHOCLES, and EURIPIDES.
Electra complex See OEDIPUS COMPLEX
electric automobile Battery-powered motor vehicle. Originating in
the 1880s, electric cars were used for private passenger, truck, and bus
transportation in cities, where their low speeds and limited battery range
were not drawbacks, and the cars became popular for their quietness and
low maintenance costs. Until 1920 they were competitive with gasoline-
fueled cars; they became less so after the electric self-starter made
gasoline-powered cars more attractive and MASS PRODUCTION made them
cheaper to produce. In Europe electric vehicles have been used as short-
range delivery vans. Renewed interest in electric cars beginning in the
1970s, spurred especially by new consciousness of foreign oil dependency
and environmental concern, led to improvements in speed and range.
Recent laws, particularly in California, have mandated commercial pro-
duction. “Hybrid” cars employing both electric and internal combustion
engines and providing the best features of both technologies, have recently
become commercially available. Experimental vehicles have used solar
FUEL CELLS.
electric circuit See CIRCUIT
electric dipole
electrical impedance
electromyography
ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION.
bined with QUANTUM MECHANICS into the theory of QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS.
FORCE and the STRONG FORCE.
Examples include RADIO WAVES, INFRARED RADIATION, visible LIGHT, ULTRAVIOLET
RADIATION, X RAYS, and GAMMA RAYS. Electromagnetic radiation exhibits
wavelike properties such as REFLECTION, REFRACTION, DIFFRACTION, and INTERFER-
ENCE, but also exhibits particlelike properties in that its energy occurs in
discrete packets, or quanta. Though all types of electromagnetic radiation
travel at the same speed, they vary in FREQUENCY and WAVELENGTH, and inter-
act with matter differently. A VACUUM is the only perfectly transparent
medium; all others absorb some frequencies of electromagnetic radiation.
electromagnetic spectrum Total range of FREQUENCIES or WAVELENGTHs
of ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION. The spectrum ranges from waves of long
wavelength (low frequency) to those of short wavelength (high fre-
quency); it comprises, in order of increasing frequency (or decreasing
wavelength): very-low-frequency to ultrahigh-frequency RADIO WAVEs,
MICROWAVEs, INFRARED RADIATION, visible LIGHT, ULTRAVIOLET RADIATION, X-RAYs,
and GAMMA RAYs. In a VACUUM, all waves of the electromagnetic spectrum
travel at the same speed: 299,792,458 m/sec (186,282 mi/sec).
AUDION,
electrophoresis
Eleusinian Mysteries
Elephant Man orig. Joseph (Carey) Merrick (b. Aug. 5, 1862,
Elgin
by Tory opponents in England and French-Canadian rioters in Montreal.
He negotiated the Reciprocity Treaty (1854) between the Canadian colo-
nies and the U.S. In 1857 he left Canada to serve in diplomatic posts in
China, Japan, and India.
Elgin Marbles
ential English-language modernist poet. He won the Nobel Prize for Lit-
erature in 1948; from then until his death he achieved public admiration
unequaled by any other 20th-century poet.
miraculously changed into roses. This transformation convinced him of the
worthiness of her kind endeavours, about which he had been chiding her.
Elizabethan
Elsevier family See ELZEVIR FAMILY
Elsheimer
Embargo Act Legislation by the U.S. Congress in December 1807 that
closed U.S. ports to all exports and restricted imports from Britain. The
act was Pres. THOMAS JEFFERSON’s response to British and French interfer-
ence with neutral U.S. merchant ships during the NAPOLEONIC WARS. The
embargo had little effect in Europe, but it imposed an unpopular restric-
tion on New England merchants and exporters (see HARTFORD CONVENTION).
Legislation passed in 1809 lifted the embargo, but continued British inter-
ference with U.S. shipping led to the WAR OF 1812.
Embden
émigré nobility
assumption of the title, as a putative successor of Charlemagne, was a
direct threat to the HABSBURG DYNASTY. Queen VICTORIA of Britain took the title
empress of India. Non-European peoples whose rulers have been called
emperor include the Chinese, Japanese, Mughals, Incas, and Aztecs.
emphysema
harvest and before the next growing season, the land was used by the
community for the grazing of livestock and other purposes. In England
the movement for enclosure began in the 12th century and proceeded rap-
idly from 1450 to 1640; the process was virtually complete by the end of
the 19th century. In the rest of Europe, enclosure made little progress until
the 19th century. Common rights over arable land have now been largely
eliminated.
encomienda
endoscopy
English Channel or the Channel French La Manche
turbines. INTERNAL-COMBUSTION ENGINES were developed by NIKOLAUS OTTO
and RUDOLF DIESEL in the late 19th century. Gas turbines and rocket engines
came into use in the later 20th century. See also DIESEL ENGINE, GASOLINE
ENGINE, JET ENGINE, ROCKET, and ROTAR Y ENGINE.
engineering Professional art of applying science to the optimum con-
version of the resources of nature to the uses of humankind. Engineering
is based principally on physics, chemistry, and mathematics and their
NEERING, CIVIL ENGINEERING, CHEMICAL ENGINEERING. GENETIC ENGINEERING, MECHANI-
CAL ENGINEERING, MILITAR Y ENGINEERING.
ENIAC
iron) in magnesium- and iron-rich igneous rock types. Enstatite crystal-
lizes in the orthorhombic system (three unequal axes at right angles to
each other).
entablature Assemblage of horizontal moldings and bands supported
by the columns of Classical buildings. The entablature is usually divided
into three main sections: the lowest band, or architrave, which originally
took the form of a beam running from support to support; the central band,
or frieze, consisting of an unmolded strip with or without ornament; and
the top band, or cornice, constructed from a series of moldings that project
from the edge of the frieze. Most entablatures correspond to or are derived
from the Doric, Ionic, or Corinthian ORDER.
entamoeba
Eocene
Epicurus
fers from cells in which episomes have been incorporated in the chromo-
somes have been used to determine the locations of genes on the
chromosome.
epistatic gene
privileges and protections, such as exemption from compulsory military
service and economic support by their husbands. Supporters, led by the
NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN, argued that discriminatory state and
federal laws left many women in a state of economic dependency.
equality Generally, an ideal of uniformity in treatment or status by those
in a position to affect either. Acknowledgment of the right to equality often
must be coerced from the advantaged by the disadvantaged. Equality of
opportunity was the founding creed of U.S. society, but equality among
all peoples and between the sexes has proved easier to legislate than to
achieve in practice. Social or religious inequality is deeply ingrained in
some cultures and thus difficult to overcome (see CASTE). Government
efforts to achieve economic equality include enhancing opportunities
through tax policy, subsidized training and education, redistributing
wealth or resources, and preferential treatment of those historically treated
unequally (see AFFIRMATIVE ACTION). See also CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT; FEMINISM;
GAY RIGHTS MOVEMENT; HUMAN RIGHTS; UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS.
DIFFERENTIAL
laws of PHYSICS. See also SYSTEM OF EQUATIONS.
by British authorities (1827–58) before the
official takeover by the Spanish. The main-
land was not effectively occupied by the
Spanish until 1936.
Independence was
declared in 1968, followed by a reign of
terror and economic chaos under the dictatorial president Macías Nguema,
who was overthrown by a military coup in 1979 and later executed.
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo became leader of the country in 1979.
A new constitution was adopted in 1982, but political unrest persisted into
the 21st century despite the country’s oil wealth.
eques
equation, algebraic See ALGEBRAIC EQUATION
equation, difference See DIFFERENCE EQUATION
equation, quadratic See QUADRATIC EQUATION
equation of motion See equation of MOTION
equation of state See equation of STATE
equations, system of See SYSTEM OF EQUATIONS
Equator Great circle around the Earth that is everywhere equidistant
from the geographic poles and lies in a plane perpendicular to the Earth’s
axis. This geographic, or terrestrial, Equator divides the Earth into the
Northern and Southern Hemispheres and forms the imaginary reference
line on the Earth’s surface from which LATITUDE is reckoned (i.e., 0° lati-
tude). In astronomy, the celestial equator is the great circle in which the
plane of the terrestrial Equator intersects the celestial sphere; it is thus
equidistant from the celestial poles. When the Sun lies in its plane, day
and night are everywhere of equal length; this happens at the EQUINOXes.
Equatorial Africa See FRENCH EQUATORIAL AFRICA
equatorial coordinates See CELESTIAL COORDINATES
descended from the dawn horse (see EOHIPPUS). Wild horses, which once
inhabited much of northern Eurasia, were smaller and had shorter legs
than their domesticated descendants. See also PRZEWALSKI’S HORSE.
equinox
in approximation theory with Paul Turan, and with Atle Selberg gave an
astounding elementary proof of the prime number theorem (1949).
Famously eccentric, he traveled almost constantly for his last 40 years,
collaborating with hundreds of mathematicians on numerous problems.
Erech
Erigena
palatial buildings, royal tombs, and paved roads have been uncovered,
leading to hypotheses that the site represents a Xia capital. The society
employed advanced bronze technology. The relationship between Erlitou
bronzes and those produced earlier at Qijia in Gansu remains unclear. See
HONGSHAN CULTURE; NEOLITHIC PERIOD.
ermine
WATERGATE SCANDAL, he became something of a folk hero for his unceas-
ing pursuit of evidence in the face of White House claims of executive
privilege. His earthy humour, distinctive accent, and unfailing charm con-
tributed to his popularity.
Erving, Julius (Winfield) (b. Feb. 22, 1950, Roosevelt, N.Y., U.S.)
U.S. basketball star. He played two years at the University of Massachu-
setts before joining the professional American Basketball Association
(ABA). At 6 ft 7in.
(2 m), “Doctor J” played forward for the Virginia
Squires (1971–73) and the New York Nets (1973–76), whom he led to
two ABA titles (1974, 1976). After the merger of the ABA and NBA, Erv-
ing was traded to the Philadelphia 76ers (1977–87) and won a league title
in 1983. He was known for swarming defense, imaginative drives to the
basket, and climactic slam dunks.
erythema
Escoffier
Espartero
of the FRENCH REVOLUTION in 1789, when the deputies of the Third Estate
led in founding the NATIONAL ASSEMBLY.
Este family
Essex, Robert Devereux, 2nd earl of (b. Nov. 10, 1567, Neth-
Essex, Robert Devereux, 3rd
earl of (b. 1591, London, Eng.—d.
Sept. 14, 1646, London) English
military commander. Son of the 2nd earl of ESSEX, he began his military
career in 1620 and commanded forces for CHARLES I until the LONG PARLIA-
MENT deposed Charles’s ministers (1640). As the ENGLISH CIVIL WARS began,
he was appointed to command the Parliamentary army. He fought against
the Royalists at the indecisive Battle of Edgehill (1642) and advanced on
London in 1643. His army was besieged at Lostwithiel, Cornwall, in 1644,
and all surrendered except Essex, who escaped by sea. He resigned his
command in 1645.
Essex, Walter Devereux, 1st earl of (b. Sept. 16, 1541, Car-
marthen, Carmarthenshire, Wales—d. Sept. 22, 1576, Dublin, Ire.)
English soldier. Born to a titled family, he helped suppress a rebellion in
northern England in 1569 and was made earl of Essex in 1572. In 1573
he offered to subdue and colonize, at his own expense, a portion of Ulster
that had not accepted English overlordship. There he treacherously cap-
tured and executed the Irish rebel leaders and massacred hundreds of the
populace, contributing to Irish bitterness toward the English. ELIZABETH I
commanded him to break off the enterprise in 1575. He died of dysen-
tery shortly after returning to Ireland from England.
establishment clause or establishment-of-religion clause
Clause in the 1st Amendment to the U.S. CONSTITUTION forbidding Con-
gress from establishing a state religion. It prevents the passage of any law
that gives preference to or forces belief in any one religion. It is paired
with a clause that prohibits limiting the free expression of religion.
estate law Laws governing the nature and extent of an owner’s rights
with respect to REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY. When used in connection with
PROBATE proceedings, it refers to the laws governing the disposition of the
total property of whatever kind owned by a person at the time of death.
See also ESTATE TAX, PROPERTY, PROPERTY TAX.
Estates General or States General French États-Généraux.
In pre-Revolutionary France, the representative assembly of the three
“estates” or orders of the realm: the clergy and the nobility (both privi-
leged minorities) as well as the THIRD ESTATE, which represented the major-
ity of the people. Usually summoned by monarchs in times of crisis, the
Estates General met at irregular intervals from the 14th century on; it was
of limited effectiveness because the monarchy usually dealt with local
Estates instead. The last meeting of the Estates General was at the start
Estremadura See EXTREMADURA
estrogen
ether
Ethiopic
he held that humans are differentiated from the rest of the natural world
by their possession of a soul, an entity that cannot be explained in terms
of natural processes. He also was known as an interpreter of ARISTOTLE. He
won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1908.
Euclid
Eumenes
ing the PYRENEES, ALPS, APENNINES, CARPATHIANs, and BALKAN MOUNTAINS. A
(see KOSOVO CONFLICT; BOSNIAN CONFLICT). See also EUROPEAN UNION; NATO.
See map on following page.
Europe, Council of Organization of more than 40 European states
formed to promote European unity, protect human rights, and facilitate
social and economic progress. Established in 1949 by 10 western Euro-
pean states, it has devised international agreements on human rights and
established a number of special bodies and expert committees on social,
legal, and cultural issues. It is headquartered in Strasbourg, France. (The
Council of Europe should not be confused with the European Council,
which is a policy-making body of the EUROPEAN UNION.)
European Aeronautic Defence and Space Co. (EADS) Euro-
pean aerospace company that is one of the world’s largest. It was formed
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Europe (cid:2) European Economic Community
European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) International
organization established in 1958 to form a common market for develop-
ing peaceful uses of atomic energy. It originally had six members; it now
includes all members of the EUROPEAN UNION. Among its aims were to
facilitate the establishment of a nuclear energy industry on a European
rather than a national scale, coordinate research, encourage construction
of power plants, establish safety regulations, and establish a common
market for trade in nuclear equipment and materials. In 1967 its govern-
ing bodies were merged into the EUROPEAN COMMUNITY.
European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) Administrative
agency designed to integrate the coal and steel industries of France, West
Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg. It originated
in the plan of ROBERT SCHUMAN (1950) to establish a common market for
coal and steel by those countries willing to submit to an independent
authority. Created in 1952, the ECSC came to include all members of the
EUROPEAN UNION. It initially removed barriers to trade in coal, coke, steel,
pig iron, and scrap iron; it later supervised the reduction of its members’
excess production. In 1967 its governing bodies were merged into the
EUROPEAN COMMUNITY. When the treaty expired in 2002, the ECSC was dis-
solved.
European Community (EC) Organization formed in 1967 with the
merger of the EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY, EUROPEAN COAL AND STEEL
COMMUNITY, and EUROPEAN ATOMIC ENERGY COMMUNITY. The merger created a
judges. See also INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE.
European Defense Community (EDC) Attempt by western Euro-
pean powers, with U.S. support, to counterbalance the overwhelming con-
ventional military ascendancy of the Soviet Union in Europe by creating
a supranational European army, including West German forces. A treaty
was concluded in 1952, but the French parliament’s refusal to ratify the
treaty in 1954 brought an end to the project. One consequence of the
French action was the decision in 1955 to rearm West Germany and allow
its entry into NATO. In 1955 the EDC was replaced by the WESTERN EURO-
PEAN UNION.
European Economic Community (EEC) later European Com-
munity (EC) known as the Common Market Association of Euro-
pean countries designed to promote European economic unity. It was
established by the TREATY OF ROME in 1957 to develop the economies of the
member states into a single common market and to build a political union
of the states of western Europe. The EEC also sought to establish a single
commercial policy toward nonmember countries, to coordinate transpor-
tation systems, agricultural policies, and general economic policies, to
remove measures restricting free competition, and to assure the mobility
of labour, capital, and entrepreneurship among member states. The liber-
alized trade policies it sponsored from the 1950s were highly successful
in increasing trade and economic prosperity in western Europe. In 1967
its governing bodies were merged into the EUROPEAN COMMUNITY. In 1993
the EEC was renamed the European Community (EC); it is now the prin-
cipal organization within the EUROPEAN UNION.
European Free Trade Association (EFTA) International organi-
European Space Agency (ESA) French Agence Spatiale
Européenne Western European space and space-technology research
organization headquartered in Paris. It was founded in 1975 from the
merger of the European Launcher Development Organisation (ELDO) and
the European Space Research Organisation (ESRO), both established in
1964. Members are Austria, Belgium, Britain, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Ireland, Italy, The Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Swe-
den, and Switzerland. Canada, through a special cooperative agreement,
participates in some projects. The ESA developed the Ariane series of
space launch vehicles, and it supports a launch facility in French Guiana.
It has launched a system of meteorological satellites (Meteosat) as well
as the Giotto space probe, which examined the nucleus of HALLEY’S COMET,
and Hipparcos, a satellite that measured the PARALLAXes, positions, and
PROPER MOTIONs of more than 100,000 stars. It is also a participant in the
construction of the INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION.
eurypterid
Cressida in WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE’s
peare, GEORGE BERNARD SHAW, and
Evans, Frederick H(enry) (b.
Evans-Pritchard, Sir E(dward) E(van) (b. Sept. 21, 1902, Crow-
evaporite
the amount of solar radiation, atmospheric vapor pressure, temperature,
wind, and soil moisture. Evapotranspiration accounts for most of the water
lost from the soil during the growth of a crop. Estimation of evapotrans-
piration rates is thus important in planning IRRIGATION schemes.
Evarts
EVOLUTION, ERNST MAYR, PARALLEL EVOLUTION, PHYLOGENY, SOCIOCULTURAL EVOLUTION,
SPECIATION.
Evripos Strait See EURIPUS STRAIT
Ewald
keeps the power of the executive more or less equal to that of the JUDI-
CIAR Y and the LEGISLATURE. See also MAYOR, PRESIDENT, PRIME MINISTER.
exegesis
of murder may be reduced to manslaughter if the accused is found to be
suffering diminished capacity (see DIMINISHED RESPONSIBILITY). The Italian
penal code allows consideration of motives of honour. Extenuating cir-
cumstances also are a factor in many civil actions.
extinction (of species) Dying out or termination of a species. It
occurs when a species can no longer reproduce at replacement levels.
Most past extinctions are thought to have resulted from environmental
changes that the doomed species was either unable to adapt to or that
caused it to adapt so thoroughly that it became a distinctly new species.
The effect of humans on the environment, through hunting, collecting,
and habitat destruction, has become the principal factor in plant and ani-
mal extinctions.
extortion Unlawful exaction of money or property through intimida-
tion or undue exercise of authority. It may include threats of physical
harm, criminal prosecution, or public exposure. Some forms of threat,
especially those made in writing, are occasionally singled out for sepa-
rate statutory treatment as blackmail. See also BRIBER Y.
extradition Process by which one state, at the request of another,
returns a person for trial for a crime punishable by the laws of the request-
ing state and committed outside the state of refuge. Extradition is regu-
lated within countries by extradition acts and between countries by
treaties. Some principles of extradition are common to many countries.
Most decline to surrender their own nationals. Countries also generally
recognize the right of political ASYLUM. In view of the solidarity of nations
in the repression of crime, however, countries are usually willing to coop-
erate in bringing criminals to justice.
extrasensory perception (ESP) Perception that involves awareness
of information about something (such as a person or event) not gained
through the SENSEs and not deducible from previous experience. Classic
forms of ESP include telepathy, clairvoyance, and precognition. No con-
clusive demonstrations of the existence of ESP in any individual have
been given, but popular belief in the phenomenon remains widespread,
and people who claim to possess ESP are sometimes employed by inves-
tigative teams searching for missing persons or things. See also PARAPSY-
CHOLOGY.
extrasolar planets See PLANETS OF OTHER STARS
extravert See INTROVERT AND EXTRAVERT
Extremadura or Estremadura
explosive Any substance or device that can produce a volume of rap-
idly expanding GAS in an extremely brief period. Mechanical explosives,
which depend on a physical reaction (e.g., overloading a container with
compressed air until it bursts), are little used except in mining. Nuclear
explosives (see NUCLEAR WEAPON) use either NUCLEAR FISSION or NUCLEAR FUSION.
Export-Import Bank of the United States (Ex-Im Bank) One
ROUAULT, CHAIM SOUTINE, MAX BECKMANN, KÄTHE KOLLWITZ, and ERNST BARLACH.
The group of artists known as Der BLAUE REITER were also considered
Expressionists. Expressionism was the dominant style in Germany after
World War I; postwar Expressionists included GEORGE GROSZ and OTTO
DIX. Its emotional qualities were adopted by other 20th-century art move-
ments. See also ABSTRACT EXPRESSIONISM.
extenuating circumstance or mitigating circumstance In
Exupéry, Antoine de Saint- See Antoine de SAINT-EXUPÉR Y
Eyasi
the PERSIAN GULF WAR.
FaFlall)h
pastel colours. Some grow to 1 in. (2.5 cm) or more in length. They live
in freshwater ponds in Europe, Central Asia, western North America, the
drier regions of Africa, and Australia. See also SHRIMP.
fairy tale Simple narrative typically of folk origin dealing with super-
natural beings. Fairy tales may be written or told for the amusement of
children or may have a more sophisticated narrative containing super-
natural or obviously improbable events, scenes, and personages and often
having a whimsical, satirical, or moralistic character. The term embraces
popular folktales such as “Cinderella” and “Puss in Boots,” as well as art
fairy tales of later invention, such as those by HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN. It
is often difficult to distinguish between tales of literary and oral origin,
because folktales have received literary treatment from early times, and
literary tales can often be traced back to oral tradition.
Faisalabad
and ROBERT STEPHENSON designed two tubular railway bridges in Wales;
Fairbairn designed the hydraulic riveters used in constructing one of them.
Fairbanks City (pop., 2000: 30,224), east-central Alaska, U.S., situ-
ated at the junction of the Tanana and Chena rivers. Founded in 1902 after
a gold strike, it was named for Charles W. Fairbanks. As the northern
terminus of the ALASKA HIGHWAY and the railroad, it is the main supply
centre for the northern Alaskan oil business (see TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE).
Located nearby are Fort Wainwright, Eielson Air Force Base, and the
University of Alaska, Fairbanks (1917). Fairbanks is the site of the annual
800-mi (1,290-km) Yukon Marathon boat race and the North American
Championship Sled Dog Races.
Fairbanks, Douglas orig. Douglas Elton Ulman (b. May 23,
Fairfax (of Cameron), Thomas Fairfax, 3rd Baron (b. Jan. 17,
holes or on cliff ledges. Some species capture birds in midair; others live
on hares, mice, lizards, and insects. See also GYRFALCON, HAWK, KESTREL, MER-
LIN, PEREGRINE FALCON.
Falconet
name St. ISIDORE OF SEVILLA. The collection was intended to protect the rights
of diocesan bishops against encroachment by their metropolitan superi-
ors and to protect the clergy from lay interference. The decretals also
emphasized the authority of the pope at the expense of that of the arch-
bishops. They consist of laws, papal letters, and decrees of councils—
some genuine but many (including the famous DONATION OF CONSTANTINE)
forgeries. Widely accepted by the end of the 10th century, the collection
was not proved a hoax until the 17th century.
falsework or centering Temporary framework used during construc-
tion to support arches and similar structures while the mortar or concrete
is setting or the steel is being joined. As soon as the work is set and the
structure is self-supporting, the centering is struck (carefully removed).
Falun Gong
1966 he was sent to a communal farm to be reeducated. After the death
of MAO ZEDONG in 1976, Fang’s party membership was restored.
Appointed a vice president of one branch of Keda in 1985, he began work
on restructuring it and reforming educational policy. During the demon-
strations in Tiananmen Square he took refuge in the U.S. embassy, and
in 1990 he and his wife were allowed to leave China. He subsequently
conducted research in Britain and the U.S.
Fanon
Farnese, Alessandro, duke di Parma and Piacenza (b. Aug.
27, 1545, Rome—d. Dec. 3, 1592, Arras, France) Regent of the Nether-
lands (1578–92) for PHILIP II of Spain. He was educated at the court of
Madrid, where he had been sent to prove his father’s loyalty to the Hab-
sburgs. In 1578 Philip II appointed him governor-general of the Nether-
lands, where his mother, MARGARET OF PARMA, had been regent earlier. His
great achievement was the restoration of Spanish rule in the southern
provinces and perpetuation of Roman Catholicism there. He succeeded
by astute statesmanship and military operations against the alliance of
rebellious Protestant provinces led by WILLIAM THE SILENT. In 1586 he suc-
ceeded his father as duke of Parma and Piacenza, but he never returned
to Italy to rule.
Farnese
joined the NATION OF ISLAM in 1955, and for a time he assisted MALCOLM X
in Boston. After Malcolm converted to SUNNI Islam, Farrakhan denounced
him and replaced him as minister of Mosque No. 7 in Harlem. Farrakhan
later expressed regret at having contributed to the climate of antagonism
that preceded Malcolm’s assassination in 1965. When Warith Deen
Mohammed, ELIJAH MUHAMMAD’s successor as leader of the Nation of Islam,
gradually began integrating the organization into the orthodox Muslim
community, Farrakhan broke away and formed his own organization, also
called the Nation of Islam (1978). A compelling orator whose rhetoric
often descended into overt ANTI-SEMITISM, Farrakhan was nonetheless effec-
tive in encouraging African American self-reliance and unity. He was the
main organizer of the Million Man March on Washington, D.C., in 1995.
In 2000 Farrakhan and Mohammed recognized each other as fellow Mus-
lims, and Farrakhan subsequently moved his group closer to orthodox
Islam and moderated his racial remarks.
Farrar
Fatah
Faunus
dance. Creation begins at the most perfect level, God, and descends
through the world of the spirit to the least perfect level, the world of mat-
ter. The fayF theory was refuted by al-GHAZ0Lq in the 11th century.
FayÆal
been adopted by the opposition Democratic Party, and the Federalist Party
disappeared. Notable Federalists included JOHN MARSHALL, RUFUS KING,
TIMOTHY PICKERING, and CHARLES PINCKNEY.
Feininger
PARTY.
make them useful for interpreting the origins of rocks. Natural feldspars
can be divided into ALKALI and PLAGIOCLASE feldspars.
feldspar, alkali See ALKALI FELDSPAR
feldspathoid
fenghuang or feng-huang
of Succession to allow his daughter (the future ISABELLA II) instead of his
brother (Don Carlos [1788–1855]) to succeed him, which triggered the
opposition movement, CARLISM.
Ferdinand the Catholic See FERDINAND V
Ferdowsl
after the fall of NAPOLEON, as king of the united Kingdom of the Two
Sicilies. His despotic rule led to an uprising in 1820, after which he was
forced to grant a constitution. With Austria’s aid, he overthrew the con-
stitutional government in 1821.
Ferdinand II known as Ferdinand the Catholic Spanish
Fernando el Católico (b. March 10, 1452, Sos, Aragon—d. Jan. 23,
1516) King of Aragon from 1479, king of Castile (as Ferdinand V) from
1474 (joint sovereign with Queen ISABELLA I until 1504), king of Sicily (as
Ferdinand II, 1468–1516), and king of Naples (as Ferdinand III, 1503–
16). The son of John II of Aragon (1398–1479), Ferdinand married Isa-
bella of Castile in 1469 and fought to impose his authority over the nobles
in the two kingdoms. As part of an effort to modernize Castile, they
banned all religions other than Roman Catholicism, leading to the SPAN-
ISH INQUISITION (1478) and the expulsion of the Jews (1492). Conquest of
Granada in 1492 made it possible to support CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS’s voy-
ages to the New World. Ferdinand furthered his expansionary policies in
the Mediterranean and in Africa. After the conquest of Naples in 1503,
during the ITALIAN WARS, Spain rivaled France as the most powerful state
in Europe. By uniting the Spanish kingdoms into the nation of Spain, Fer-
dinand began Spain’s entry into the modern period of imperial expansion.
Ferdinand II (Aragon) See FERDINAND V
Fermat
Many are small, fragile plants; others are treelike (see TREE FERN). The life
cycle is characterized by an ALTERNATION OF GENERATIONS between the mature,
fronded form (the SPOROPHYTE) familiar in greenhouses and gardens and the
form that strongly resembles a MOSS or LIVERWORT (the GAMETOPHYTE). Ferns
are popular houseplants.
Fernando Póo See BIOKO
Ferrara
and Senate (1854–64, 1865–69). Originally a Whig, he opposed the exten-
sion of slavery to the territories, and he was one of the leaders of the
movement that resulted in the formation of the REPUBLICAN PARTY (1854).
Despite his personal dislike for Pres. ANDREW JOHNSON, he voted for acquit-
tal in Johnson’s Senate impeachment trial.
fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) Various CONGENITAL DISORDERs in a
newborn caused by the mother drinking alcohol during pregnancy. The
main symptoms are retarded growth, abnormalities of the central NERVOUS
SYSTEM, and certain face and head abnormalities. The child may be men-
tally retarded. Behavioral problems (e.g., poor concentration, impulsive-
ness) are sometimes the only obvious symptoms. The syndrome is
common in babies born to chronic alcoholics, but health care organiza-
tions now commonly recommend that women cease drinking alcohol
entirely while pregnant. Other disorders have been linked to alcohol in
breast milk.
fetial
represented a substantial group in the Legislative Assembly, but it disap-
peared when the insurrection of 1792 overthrew the monarchy.
fever or pyrexia
Practical Reason (1788), was his most original and characteristic work.
To demonstrate that PRACTICAL REASON is really the root of reason in its
entirety, the absolute ground of all knowledge as well as of humanity
altogether, he started from a supreme principle, the ego, which is inde-
pendent and sovereign, so that all other knowledge is deducible from it.
In his famous patriotic lectures Addresses to the German Nation (1807–
08) he attempted to rally German nationalists against Napoleon. He is
regarded as one of the great transcendental idealists. His son Immanuel
Hermann von Fichte (1796–1879) was also a philosopher.
Ficino
Fighting Falcon See F-16
fighting fish See SIAMESE FIGHTING FISH
Figueres
political corruption; because of his sharp commentary he was eventually
effectively banished from the theatre, whereupon he took up the study of
law. In 1748 he was appointed a magistrate, in which role he established
a new tradition of justice and suppression of crime in London. He prob-
ably wrote Shamela (1741), a burlesque of SAMUEL RICHARDSON’s Pamela
that he never claimed. In the entertaining and original Joseph Andrews
(1742) he also parodies Richardson’s novel. Tom Jones (1749), his most
popular work, is noted for its great comic gusto, vast gallery of charac-
ters, and contrasted scenes of high- and lowlife. The more sober Amelia
(1751) anticipates the Victorian domestic novel. In these works he helped
develop the English novel as a planned, realistic narrative genre survey-
ing contemporary society.
fieldlark See PIPIT
Fields, Dame Gracie orig. Grace Stansfield (b. Jan. 9, 1898,
Fields, W.C. orig. William Claude Dukenfield (b. Jan. 29, 1880,
Fiesole, Mino da See MINO DA FIESOLE
PIDOU (1969–74), VALER Y GISCARD D’ESTAING (1974–81), FRANCOIS MITTERRAND
Filarete
SERGEI EISENSTEIN, FILM NOIR, NEW WAVE.
filter-pressing Process that occurs during crystallization of certain
IGNEOUS ROCKS, in which liquid is separated from the crystals by pressure.
As the crystals grow and accumulate in MAGMA, a crystal mesh may be
formed. Pressure applied by the weight of crystals above or by outside
forces may force the more mobile liquid out of the mesh and also may
fracture or crush the remaining crystals. Filter-pressing has been used to
explain the formation of rocks consisting of only one kind of mineral.
fin whale or finback whale or razorback whale or common
rorqual
Finlay
676 I
fir (cid:2) First International
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
KARL MAR X, Pierre-Joseph PROUDHON, LOUIS-AUGUSTE BLANQUI, and MIKHAIL
BAKUNIN. A clash between Marx’s centralized SOCIALISM and Bakunin’s
ANARCHISM in 1872 caused the International to split, and it was dissolved
in 1876. Though it was feared at the time as a formidable power with
millions of members, and several countries tried to have it outlawed, its
membership was never more than 20,000 and it served mainly as a uni-
fying force for labour in Europe.
Fischer-Dieskau
FIS See ISLAMIC SALVATION FRONT
of the work of ECONOMIC STABILIZERS. See also BUSINESS CYCLE.
Fischer projection Method of representing the three-dimensional
structures of MOLECULEs on a page, devised by EMIL FISCHER. By convention,
horizontal lines represent bonds projecting from the plane of the paper
toward the viewer, and vertical lines represent bonds projecting away from
the viewer. Fischer projections are a convenient way to depict chiral mol-
ecules (see OPTICAL ACTIVITY) and distinguish between pairs of enantiomers
(see RACEMATE). They are most often used to depict ISOMERs of the SUGARs.
See also CHEMICAL FORMULA.
Fischer, Bobby orig. Robert James Fischer (b. March 9, 1943,
Chicago, Ill., U.S.) U.S. chess mas-
ter. He became a grandmaster at age
15, then a record. In 1972 Fischer
defeated BORIS SPASSKY to become the
only American to win the world
chess championship. An intense and
eccentric personality, he was a
devout Christian fundamentalist who
frequently condemned the Soviet
Union for godlessness; he was
deprived of his title in 1975 after
refusing to meet his Soviet chal-
lenger, ANATOLY KARPOV. He remained
out of the game thereafter except for
a victorious private rematch with
Spassky in Yugoslavia in 1992; the game violated U.S. sanctions against
Yugoslavia, and Fischer has remained abroad ever since.
Fischer, Emil (Hermann) (b. Oct. 9, 1852, Euskirchen, Prussia—d.
July 15, 1919, Berlin, Ger.) German organic chemist. He received his
Ph.D. in 1874. He determined the structures of URIC ACID, CAFFEINE, and
related compounds, showing that all are derivatives of a single compound
he named PURINE. This led him to study PROTEIN structure and the ways in
which AMINO ACIDs are combined in proteins. He determined the molecu-
lar structures of GLUCOSE, FRUCTOSE, and many other SUGARs, verifying his
results by synthesizing each, and distinguished the 15 stereoisomers of
glucose (see ISOMER; CONFIGURATION; OPTICAL ACTIVITY). His researches into the
sugars were of unparalleled importance to organic chemistry and earned
him in 1902 the second Nobel Prize for Chemistry. His investigations of
FERMENTATION laid the foundations of ENZYME chemistry.
fitnah
Fisher (of Kilverstone), John Arbuthnot Fisher, 1st Baron
CAMPAIGN.
Fiume question
Flagstad
also PLAICE; SOLE.
Flaubert
ROGIER VAN DER WEYDEN, PETRUS CHRISTUS, DIRCK BOUTS, HUGO VAN DER GOES,
the Flemish BAROQUE PERIOD. See also EARLY NETHERLANDISH ART.
Flemish language See DUTCH LANGUAGE
Fletcher, John See Francis BEAUMONT
Fleury
Florence Italian Firenze
684 I
Florida (cid:2) flower
Florida Controversy, West See WEST FLORIDA CONTROVERSY
F. GREENAWAY—NATURAL HISTORY PHOTOGRAPHIC
AGENCY/EB INC.
Flounder (Platichthys)
The life cycle of a flowering plant. (1) A pollen grain is released from the anther
and settles on the stigma. (2) A pollen tube forms and grows through the style
toward the ovule opening (micropyle). (3) Two of the nuclei (polar nuclei) in the
ovule’s embryo sac migrate to the centre to form a single cell. Three cells migrate to
the micropyle, and one enlarges to become the egg. Two sperm that have formed
from mitotic division of the pollen grain’s generative cell enter the embryo sac
through the micropyle. (4) One sperm fuses with the egg, resulting in a fertilized
egg (zygote), which develops into an embryo. The second sperm fuses with the two
polar nuclei to form the endosperm nucleus. (5) This nucleus divides to form a tissue
(endosperm) that provides nutrients for the developing embryo.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
fluorine
flu See INFLUENZA
Fluxus
Focke-Wulf 190 (Fw 190)
Fontane
690 I
fool’s gold (cid:2) football
century. Often deformed, dwarfed, or crippled, fools were kept for luck
as well as amusement, in the belief that deformity can avert the evil eye
and that abusive raillery can transfer ill luck from the abused to the abuser.
In some societies, they were regarded as inspired with poetic and pro-
phetic powers. The greatest literary characterization of the fool is found
in WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE’s King Lear.
fool’s gold See PYRITE
OF UNITS; YARD.
PROSODY.
since 1929. In early 2001 a major outbreak occurred in the United King-
dom, followed shortly by outbreaks in The Netherlands and France.
football or association football or soccer Game in which two
also AUSTRALIAN RULES FOOTBALL; GAELIC FOOTBALL; FOOTBALL, GRIDIRON; and RUGBY.
Foot, Michael (b. July 23, 1913,
Plymouth, Devon, Eng.) Leader of
Great Britain’s LABOUR PARTY (1980–
83). He worked as a newspaper edi-
tor and columnist (1937–74) and
served in Parliament
(1945–55,
1960–92). He served in HAROLD WIL-
SON’s cabinet as secretary of state for
employment (1974–76) and leader of
the House of Commons (1976–79).
A left-wing socialist, Foot became
the party’s chief in 1980 by defeat-
ing its right-wing candidate. This
and other left-wing trends caused
some Labourites to resign to found
the Social Democratic Party. His
books include Aneurin Bevan (2 vol.;
1962, 1973).
foot-and-mouth
disease
(FMD)
or hoof-and-mouth
disease Highly contagious viral
disease of cloven-footed mammals
(including cattle), spread by inges-
tion and inhalation. The afflicted ani-
mal develops
fever and painful
blisters on the tongue, lips, other tis-
sues of the mouth, muzzle or snout,
teats, and feet. FMD is endemic in
many places. Because of its rapid
spread and impact on animal produc-
tivity, it is considered the most eco-
nomically
devastating
livestock
disease in the world. It is not a human
health hazard. No effective treatment
exists; vaccines control epidemics
but have not eliminated them. Since
the virus can persist, quarantine,
slaughter, cremation or burial of car-
casses, and decontamination must be
rigorous. Strict surveillance has kept
North America largely FMD-free
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
A professional football (soccer) field. International rules allow for variations in the overall field dimensions, but the touch lines
must be longer than the goal lines. Play begins with a kickoff at the center line. When the ball is driven across the touch line, it
is put back in play by a throw-in by the opposing side. A ball driven over the goal line but not into the goal by the attacking
team is returned to play with a goal kick by the opposing goalkeeper. A player fouled in the penalty area is awarded a penalty
kick at the goal, which is defended only by the goalkeeper. Within the goal area the goalkeeper may use his hands to stop and
hold the ball.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
An American professional football field. The standard college field is nearly identical but has a wider inbounds zone. When-
ever the ball is downed in a side zone, it is put in play on the next down at the nearest inbounds line. The line marking the end
zone (within which the ball may be caught) is the goal line.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
FOOTBALL LEAGUE.
forage
692 I
Ford (cid:2) foreign workers
FOUNDATION.
Ford, John orig. Sean Aloysius O’Feeney or O’Fearna (b. Feb.
Ford, Tennessee Ernie orig. Ernest Jennings (b. Feb. 13, 1919,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
foreclosure Legal proceeding by which a borrower’s rights to a mort-
gaged property may be extinguished if the borrower fails to live up to the
obligations agreed to in the loan contract. The lender may then declare
the entire debt due and owing and may seek to satisfy it by foreclosing.
Foreclosure is commonly by a court-decreed sale of the property to the
highest bidder, who is often the lender. See also MORTGAGE.
foreign aid Transfer of capital, goods, or services from one country to
another. Foreign aid may be given in the form of capital transfers or tech-
nical assistance and training for either civilian or military purposes. Its
use in the modern era began in the 18th century, when Prussia subsidized
some of its allies. After World War II, foreign aid developed into a more
sophisticated instrument of foreign policy. International organizations,
such as the UNITED NATIONS RELIEF AND REHABILITATION ADMINISTRATION, were
created to provide aid to war-ravaged countries and newly freed colonies.
Foreign aid is often given with conditions attached, such as the require-
ment that all or part of it be used to buy goods from the donor country.
See also INTERNATIONAL MONETAR Y FUND; MARSHALL PLAN; WORLD BANK.
EXCHANGE RATE.
Foreign Legion French Légion Étrangère. French military corps
foreign service or diplomatic service Staff of a state’s
Forest, Lee De See Lee DE FOREST
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Foreman (cid:2) form I
Woods forget-me-not (Myosotis sylvat-
INGMAR HOLMASEN
formaldehyde
forsterite-fayalite
ACROPOLIS.
Foscolo
and he ran as its presidential candidate in 1924, 1928, and 1932 on a plat-
form that envisioned the ultimate demise of capitalism and the establish-
ment of a workers’ republic. Ill health forced his resignation in 1932.
Soviet dissatisfaction with his successor, EARL BROWDER, brought him back
as chairman (1945–56), but he fell from favour and was made chairman
emeritus in 1957.
Foucault
four-colour map problem In TOPOLOGY, a long-standing conjecture
asserting that no more than four colours are required to shade in any map
such that each adjacent region is coloured differently. First posed in 1852
by Francis Guthrie, a British math student, it was solved by Kenneth
Appel and Wolfgang Haken using a computer-assisted proof in 1976.
Four Freedoms Essential social and political objectives described by
Pres. FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT in his State of the Union message in January 1941:
freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom from want, and freedom
from fear of physical aggression. He called for the last freedom to be
achieved through a “worldwide reduction in armaments.” In August 1941
he and WINSTON CHURCHILL included the four freedoms in the ATLANTIC CHAR-
Fourdrinier
submitted two draft constitutions to a popular vote in 1946, and the revi-
sion was narrowly approved. The structure of the Fourth Republic was
remarkably like that of the THIRD REPUBLIC. The lower house of parliament,
renamed the National Assembly, was the locus of power. Shaky coalition
cabinets succeeded one another, and the lack of a clear-cut majority ham-
pered coherent action. Political leaders included GEORGES BIDAULT, PIERRE
MENDÈS-FRANCE, RENÉ PLEVEN, and ROBERT SCHUMAN.
TIC FOX, BAT-EARED FOX, FENNEC, GRAY FOX.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Fowler (cid:2) foxhound
Fox, George (b. July 1624, Drayton-in-the-Clay, Leicestershire,
Eng.—d. Jan. 13, 1691, London) English preacher and founder of the
Society of FRIENDS, or Quakers. The son of a weaver, he left home at age
18 in search of religious experience. Probably beginning as a PURITAN, he
reacted even more strongly than the Puritans against the tradition of the
Church of ENGLAND and came to regard personal experience as the true
source of authority, placing God-given “inward light,” or inspiration,
above creeds and scripture. He traveled the countryside on foot, preach-
ing to small groups, and he and other preachers established congregations.
The Society of Friends arose in the 1650s. The Quakers’ denunciation of
ministers and public officials and their refusal to pay tithes or take oaths
led to persecution, and Fox was imprisoned eight times between 1649 and
1673. He made missionary trips to Ireland, the Caribbean islands, North
America, and northern Europe. His Journal gives an account of his life
and of the rise of Quakerism.
Fox, Vicente Quesada (b. July 2, 1942, Mexico City, Mex.) Presi-
dent of Mexico (2000– ) whose election ended 71 years of uninterrupted
rule by the INSTITUTIONAL REVOLUTIONAR Y PARTY (PRI). After earning a degree
in business administration from the Ibero-American University in Mexico
City, Fox took classes at Harvard Business School. He later worked for
the Coca-Cola Company, serving as its chief executive in Mexico (1975–
79). In 1987 he joined the National Action Party (PAN) and the follow-
ing year was elected to the national Chamber of Deputies. Elected
governor of Guanajuato in 1995, he left the post in 1998 to focus on his
national campaign. As president he sought to improve relations with the
United States and calm civil unrest in such areas as Chiapas and Tabasco.
television broadcasting company.
Founded in 1986 by RUPERT MURDOCH, it began with 79 affiliated stations
that reached 80% of U.S. homes. The network gradually expanded its
broadcast hours to seven nights a week and gained more affiliates to make
it available across the U.S. Concentrating on shows that appealed to afflu-
ent young viewers, it added programming divisions for children, sports,
and news in the 1990s.
fox terrier Well-known breed of dog developed in England to drive
foxes from their dens. The wire-
haired variety was developed from a
rough-coated black-and-tan TERRIER;
the smooth-haired variety was devel-
Fox Broadcasting Co. U.S.
oped from the BEAGLE, GREYHOUND, BULL
SALLY ANNE THOMPSON/EB INC.
Wirehaired fox terrier
Foxglove (Digitalis)
DEREK FELL
Foxx, Jimmie orig. James Emory Foxx (b. Oct. 22, 1907,
Foyt, A(nthony) J(oseph), Jr.
Fracastoro
active life was passed during the Neoclassical period, he continued to
paint in a Rococo idiom until shortly before the French Revolution, when
he lost his patrons and livelihood.
Frame (Clutha), Janet (Paterson) (b. Aug. 28, 1924, Dunedin,
by JANE CAMPION.
frame of reference See REFERENCE FRAME
framed structure or frame structure Structure supported mainly
WAR; FRENCH EQUATORIAL AFRICA; FRENCH WEST AFRICA). In 1981 France
France
Francesca, Piero della See PIERO DELLA FRANCESCA
Francesco di Cristofano de Giudicis See FRANCIABIGIO
Franche-Comté
Franck
Francis Joseph German Franz Josef (b. Aug. 18, 1830, Schloss
Schönbrunn, near Vienna—d. Nov.
21, 1916, Schloss Schönbrunn)
Emperor of Austria (1848–1916) and
king of Hungary (1867–1916). He
became emperor during the REVOLU-
TIONS OF 1848 after the abdication of
his uncle, FERDINAND I. With his prime
minister, Felix, prince zu SCHWARZEN-
BERG, he achieved a powerful position
for Austria,
in particular with the
Punctation of OLMÜTZ convention in
1850. His harsh, absolutist
within Austria produced a strong
central government but also led to
rioting and an assassination attempt.
Following Austria’s defeat by Prus-
sia in the SEVEN WEEKS’ WAR (1866),
he responded to Hungarian national
unrest by accepting the COMPROMISE
OF 1867. He adhered to the THREE
EMPERORS’ LEAGUE and formed an alli-
ance with Prussian-led Germany that
led to the TRIPLE ALLIANCE (1882). In
1898 his wife was assassinated, and in 1889 his son RUDOLF, his heir
apparent, died in a suicide love pact. In 1914 his ultimatum to Serbia fol-
lowing the murder of the next heir presumptive, FRANCIS FERDINAND, led
Austria and Germany into WORLD WAR I.
Francis of Assisi, Saint orig. Francesco di Pietro di Bernar-
frangipani
Franklin, Rosalind (Elsie) (b.
July 25, 1920, London, Eng.—d.
April 16, 1958, London) British
biologist. After graduating from the
University of Cambridge, she con-
ducted important experimental work
for the coal and coke industries. She
later produced the X-ray diffraction
pictures that allowed JAMES D. WATSON and FRANCIS CRICK to deduce that
the three-dimensional form of DNA was a double helix. In studies of the
tobacco mosaic virus, she helped show that its RNA is located in its pro-
tein rather than in its central cavity and that this RNA is a single-stranded
helix rather than the double helix found in the DNA of bacterial viruses
and higher organisms. Her death from cancer at age 37 probably cost her
a share of the 1962 Nobel Prize awarded to Watson, Crick, and MAURICE
WILKINS.
Franz
Frankfurter, Felix (b. Nov. 15, 1882, Vienna, Austria-Hungary—d.
Feb. 22, 1965, Washington, D.C.,
U.S.) Austrian-born U.S. jurist and
public official. Immigrating to the
U.S. at the age of 12, he was edu-
cated at the City College of New
York and Harvard Law School,
where he later taught (1914–39). He
served as secretary of war (1911–13)
under Pres. WILLIAM H. TAFT. He
advised WOODROW WILSON at
PARIS PEACE CONFERENCE (1919) and
counseled FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT on NEW
DEAL legislation (1933–39). He pro-
moted ZIONISM in the U.S. and helped
found the AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
friend LOUIS BRANDEIS
UNION; his
secretly encouraged his attacks on
the SACCO-VANZETTI conviction.
1939 he was appointed by Roosevelt
to the SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED
Fraser
asserted his leadership. He seized parts of Silesia during the War of the AUS-
TRIAN SUCCESSION, strengthening Prussia considerably. He invaded Saxony in
1756 and marched on into Bohemia. Frederick was almost defeated in the
SEVEN YEARS’ WAR (1756–63), until his admirer PETER III signed a Russo-
Prussian peace treaty that lasted until 1780. The First Partition of POLAND in
1772 led to enormous territorial gains for Prussia. Austro-Prussian rivalry
led to the War of the BAVARIAN SUCCESSION (1778–79), a diplomatic victory
for Frederick, but continued fear of Habsburg ambitions led him to form a
league of German states against JOSEPH II. Under Frederick’s leadership
Prussia became one of the great states of Europe, with vastly expanded ter-
ritories and impressive military strength. In addition to modernizing the
army, Frederick also espoused the ideas of enlightened despotism and insti-
tuted numerous economic, civil, and social reforms.
Frederick III German Friedrich (b. Sept. 21, 1415, Innsbruck,
Austria—d. Aug. 19, 1493, Linz) Holy Roman emperor from 1452 and
king of Germany (as Frederick IV) from 1440. By 1439 he was the senior
member of the HABSBURG DYNASTY, and he united the Austrian holdings of
two rival branches of the dynasty (partitioned in 1379), helping to lay the
foundations for the greatness of the house of Habsburg in European
affairs. His greatest achievement was marrying his son Maximilian (later
MAXIMILIAN I) to Mary, daughter of CHARLES THE BOLD, which gave the house
of Habsburg a large part of Burgundy and made the Austrians a European
power. Frederick was the last emperor to be crowned in Rome by a pope.
Frederick V German Friedrich known as Frederick the Winter
King (b. Aug. 26, 1596, Amberg, Upper Palatinate—d. Nov. 29, 1632,
Mainz) Elector palatine of the Rhine (1610–23) and king of Bohemia (as
Frederick I) for one winter (1619–20). The Protestant Bohemian estates
revolted against the Catholic emperor FERDINAND II and offered the crown
to Frederick (1619), making him head of the Protestant union against
Catholic Austria at the beginning of the THIRTY YEARS’ WAR. He was soon
abandoned by his allies and was routed in the Battle of WHITE MOUNTAIN.
In 1622 he went into exile in Holland. In 1623 he was deprived of his
rights as an elector, and in 1628 the Upper Palatinate was annexed by
Bavaria.
Frederick VII Danish Frederik
708 I
free-enterprise system (cid:2) freedom of speech
free-enterprise system See CAPITALISM
NEWTON’S LAWS OF MOTION.
free-market economy See CAPITALISM
REPUBLICAN PARTY.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
freesia
Frémont
three persons and for singular and plural; though spelled differently, sev-
eral of these forms are pronounced identically.
French Polynesia formerly French Oceania
frequency modulation See FM
fresco painting Method of wall painting in which water-based pig-
ments are applied to wet, freshly laid lime plaster. The dry-powder
colours, when mixed with water, penetrate the surface and become a per-
manent part of the wall. This technique is also known as buon fresco, or
“true fresco,” to distinguish it from fresco secco, or “dry fresco” (paint-
ing on dry plaster). Early Minoan, Greek, and Roman wall paintings were
frescoes. The Italian Renaissance was the greatest period of fresco paint-
ing, as seen in the works of CIMABUE, GIOTTO, MASACCIO, Fra ANGELICO,
CORREGGIO, and others. MICHELANGELO’s frescoes in the Sistine Chapel and
RAPHAEL’s in the Vatican are the most famous of all. By the 18th century,
fresco had been largely replaced by oil painting. In the early 20th cen-
tury it was revived by DIEGO RIVERA and others, often as a medium for
political art. Fresco painting is also found in China and India.
Frescobaldi
Friedan
ally gave way to CRUISER. In World War II, Britain revived the term frigate
to describe escort ships equipped with SONAR and DEPTH CHARGEs and used
to guard convoys from submarines. In the postwar decades frigates also
adopted an antiaircraft role, adding RADAR and surface-to-air missiles.
Modern frigates may displace more than 3,000 tons (2,700 metric tons),
sail at a speed of 30 knots, and carry a crew of 200.
Frigg
wings. Many of the smaller fritillar-
ies are members of the genus Bolo-
ria. Many fritillary larvae
nocturnal and feed on violet leaves.
Friuli–Venezia Giulia
Front Islamique du Salut (FIS) See ISLAMIC SALVATION FRONT
Frontenac
COTS, BANANAS, and GRAPES, as well as BEAN pods, CORN grains, TOMATOES,
the MEDITERRANEAN FRUIT FLY and the
Frunze
ment of the pistons (see PISTON AND CYLINDER). On DIESEL ENGINES, which lack
SPARK PLUGS, the heat created by compressing air in the cylinders ignites the
fuel, which has been pumped in as a spray. In engines with spark igni-
tion, fuel-injection pumps are often used instead of conventional CARBU-
RETORS. Fuel injection distributes the fuel more evenly to the cylinders than
does a carburetor; more power can be developed and undesirable emis-
sions are reduced. In engines with continuous combustion, such as gas
TURBINES and liquid-fueled ROCKETS, which have no pistons to create suction,
fuel-injection systems are necessary.
Fuentes
Fulani
fulmar
PENTECOSTALISM.
fundamentalism, Islamic Conservative religious movement that
seeks a return to Islamic values and Islamic law (see SHARIA) in the face
of Western modernism, which is seen as corrupt and atheistic. Though
popularly associated in the West with Middle Eastern terrorists, only a
few Islamic fundamentalists are terrorists, and not all Arab terrorists are
fundamentalists. The Iranian revolution of 1979 established an Islamic
fundamentalist state, and the TALIBAN has established its version of the same
in much of Afghanistan. Islamic fundamentalist movements have varying
degrees of support in North Africa, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Muslim
S.East Asia, but Islamic fundamentalism represents a minority viewpoint
in the context of world Islam.
Fundy, Bay of Inlet of the Atlantic Ocean, southeastern Canada
Located between the provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, it
extends 94 mi (151 km) inland and is 32 mi (52 km) wide at its entrance.
It is noted for its fast-running tides, which may produce rises as great as
70 ft (21 m), the highest in the world. Noted also for the spectacular rock
formations and forests of its shorelines, it has several deepwater harbours,
including one at ST. JOHN, N.B. In 1948 a 51,000-acre (20,700-hectare)
section of the bay’s New Brunswick coast was set aside as Fundy National
Park.
Funen Danish Fyn
architects designed chairs made of modern materials such as tubular steel
and plastic. See also BENTWOOD FURNITURE; EARLY AMERICAN FURNITURE; SHAKER
FURNITURE.
Furtwängler
tems to detect and adapt to patterns of water movement during a wash
cycle, increasing efficiency and reducing water consumption. Other prod-
ucts using fuzzy logic include camcorders, microwave ovens, and dish-
washers. Other applications
include EXPERT
self-regulating
industrial
controls,
and computerized speech-
and handwriting-
recognition programs.
SYSTEMS,
Fw 190 See FOCKE-WULF 190
Fyodor
G. intestinalis See GIARDIA LAMBLIA
Gabar
Gaborone
Gafencu
galactic nucleus See ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEUS
galactose
Galerius
England and France, where he learned the sign method of communica-
tion. In 1816 he established the school for the deaf in Hartford, Conn.;
for more than 50 years it would remain the main American training cen-
tre for instructors of the deaf. GALLAUDET UNIVERSITY in Washington, D.C.,
is named in his honour.
Gallaudet
ous combinations with ALUMINUM, INDIUM, PHOSPHORUS, ARSENIC, and ANTIMONY,
it forms compounds (e.g., gallium arsenide and indium gallium arsenide
phosphide) with valuable SEMICONDUCTOR and optoelectronic properties;
some of these compounds form the basis for such electronic devices as
LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES and semiconductor LASERS.
Galsworthy
Gálvez
The largest island, Mangareva, is 5 mi (8 km) long and encircled by a
barrier reef 40 mi (64 km) in circumference. Mangareva rises to about
1,444 ft (440 m) in the peaks Duff and Mokoto; the chief village, Rikitea,
is on Mangareva’s eastern side. The Gambier Islands were annexed by
the French in 1881. Their economy is based on subsistence agriculture;
pearl harvesting is also of economic importance.
gambling Betting or staking of something of value on the outcome of
a game or event. Commonly associated with gambling are HORSE RACING,
BOXING, numerous playing-card and DICE games, COCKFIGHTING, JAI ALAI, rec-
reational BILLIARDS and DARTS, BINGO, and LOTTER Y. In most gambling games it
is customary to express the idea of probability in terms of “odds against
winning.” In the U.S. casino gambling, once highly restricted, is now legal
in many states, and lotteries are employed by many states to raise rev-
enues. The Internet has also become a venue for placing bets. See also
BOOKMAKING; CASINO.
solution. See also DECISION THEOR Y; PRISONER’S DILEMMA.
gamelan
also CENTRAL ASIAN ARTS; KUSHAN ART.
Gandhi
Ganga
in France and later became a French citizen. He was awarded the Nobel
Prize for Literature in 2000.
Gaozu
Garfunkel, Art See Paul SIMON
Gargano
Garnier
Garland City
Garland, Judy orig. Frances
Garuda
SOCIETY.
SLAVER Y
NEBRASKA ACT, and the DRED SCOTT DECISION and hailed JOHN BROWN’s raid.
Garter, (The Most Noble) Order of the English order of knight-
hood founded by EDWARD III in 1348 and considered the highest British
honor. Legend holds that it was created after an incident in which Edward
Gascony
gastritis
Gaudí
Gay, John (b. June 30, 1685, Barnstaple, Devon, Eng.—d. Dec. 4, 1732,
London) British poet and dramatist.
From an ancient but impoverished
Devonshire family, Gay was appren-
ticed to a silk mercer in London but
released
early. He
cofounded the journal The British
Apollo. His
poetry
collections
included Rural Sports (1713) and
Trivia (1716). He is best known for
the BALLAD OPERA The Beggar’s Opera
(1728), which ran for 62 perfor-
mances (the longest run to that date).
The play, with music by John C. Pep-
usch (1667–1752), was a cynical tale
of thieves and highwaymen intended
to mirror the moral degradation of
society; its success made it a land-
mark in music-theatre history. It was
adapted by BERTOLT BRECHT and KURT
WEILL as The Threepenny Opera
(1928). Gay was buried in Westmin-
ster Abbey.
Gay-Lussac
GE See GENERAL ELECTRIC CO.
Ge Hong
by such huge successes as Horton Hatches the Egg (1940), The Cat in
the Hat (1957), How the Grinch Stole Christmas (1957), Yertle the Turtle
(1958), and Green Eggs and Ham (1960). Such perennial best-sellers, and
his posthumous Oh, the Places You’ll Go! (1993), made him the best-
selling children’s author in the world.
Geiger counter or Geiger-Müller counter Device used for
geisha
rupted. See also GENETIC ENGINEERING, GENETICS, HARDY-WEINBERG LAW, HUMAN
GENOME PROJECT, LINKAGE GROUP.
gene therapy or gene transfer therapy Introduction of a nor-
gender gap (cid:2) General Mills
breast and other cancers, and diabetes. Some aspects of gene therapy,
including genetic manipulation and selection, research on embryonic tis-
sue, and experimentation on human subjects, have aroused ethical con-
troversy.
genealogy Study of family origins and history. It is found in most parts
of the world and is international in scope. Originally concerned with trac-
ing royal, aristocratic, or clerical lines, genealogy has broadened its scope
over the centuries, and many ordinary people now pursue it as a hobby.
In preliterate cultures genealogical information was transmitted orally,
usually as a list of names; later generations recorded this information.
Divine origins were often ascribed to kings and heroes. Modern genealo-
gists use artifacts, including ancient records, coins, deeds, tapestries,
paintings, and monuments, to help them in their work.
Genée, Dame Adeline orig. Anina Margarete Kirstina Petra
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) Set of mul-
by PHILIP MORRIS COMPANIES INC.
Several traditional gemstone cuts
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
General Telephone and Electronics Corp. See GTE CORP.
generative grammar
made possible the RECOMBINATION techniques of GENETIC ENGINEERING. An
understanding of genetics is necessary for the diagnosis, prevention, and
treatment of hereditary diseases, the breeding of plants and animals, and
the development of industrial processes that use microorganisms. See also
BEHAVIOUR GENETICS.
Geneva
genocide
the system of BINOMIAL NOMENCLATURE.
geodesy
750 I geometry (cid:2) George III
Geologic Time
Periods and systems
Epochs and series
Beginning of interval*
Biological forms
Phanerozoic
Tertiary
Cenozoic
Quaternary
Holocene
Pleistocene
Pliocene
Miocene
Oligocene
Eocene
Paleocene
Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary (65 million years ago): extinction of dinosaurs
Mesozoic
Cretaceous
Early
Paleozoic
Jurassic
Triassic
Permian
Carboniferous
Pennsylvanian
Mississippian
Devonian
Silurian
Ordovician
Cambrian
Proterozoic
Archean
Precambrian
*In millions of years before the present.
geometry See ALGEBRAIC GEOMETR Y, ANALYTIC GEOMETR Y, DIFFERENTIAL GEOM-
ETR Y, ELLIPTIC GEOMETR Y, EUCLIDEAN GEOMETR Y, FRACTAL GEOMETR Y, HYPERBOLIC GEOM-
ETR Y, NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETR Y, PROJECTIVE GEOMETR Y
MARINE GEOPHYSICS.
George I orig. George Louis German Georg Ludwig (b. May
28, 1660, Osnabrück, Hanover—d. June 11, 1727, Osnabrück) First king
of England (1714–27) from the house of HANOVER. He succeeded his father
as the elector of Hanover (1698) and fought with distinction in the War
of the SPANISH SUCCESSION. As a great-grandson of JAMES I of England and
under the Act of SETTLEMENT, George ascended the English throne in 1714.
He formed a Whig ministry and left internal politics to his ministers,
including 1ST EARL STANHOPE, VISCOUNT TOWNSHEND, and ROBERT WALPOLE. He
was unpopular because of his German manner and German mistresses and
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
2,500
4,000
Earliest humans
Earliest hominids
Earliest grasses
Earliest large mammals
Earliest flowering plants; dinosaurs in ascendance
Earliest birds and mammals
Age of Dinosaurs begins
Earliest reptiles
Earliest winged insects
Earliest vascular plants (incl. ferns and mosses)
and amphibians
Earliest land plants and insects
Earliest corals
Earliest fishes
Earliest colonial algae and soft-bodied invertebrates
Life appears; earliest algae and primitive bacteria
their involvement in the SOUTH SEA BUBBLE crisis, but he strengthened Brit-
ain’s position by forming the QUADRUPLE ALLIANCE (1718). He was suc-
ceeded by his son, GEORGE II.
George I Greek Georgios orig. Prince William of Denmark
(b. Dec. 24, 1845, Copenhagen, Den.—d. March 18, 1913, Salonika,
Greece) King of Greece. Son of CHRISTIAN IX of Denmark, he served in the
Danish navy and in 1862 was nominated to the Greek throne by Britain,
France, and Russia after the Greek king, Otto, was deposed. Accepted by
the Greek National Assembly, he ascended the throne as George I in 1863.
He oversaw the incorporation of territory in Thessaly and Epirus into
Greece as well as the annexation of Crete. In the unrest caused by the
BALKAN WARS, he was assassinated at Salonika; he was succeeded by his
son, Constantine I. His long reign was the formative period for the devel-
opment of Greece as a modern European state.
George II orig. George Augustus German Georg August (b.
YEARS’ WAR.
George III orig. George William Frederick (b. June 4, 1738,
London, Eng.—d. Jan. 29, 1820, Windsor Castle, near London) King of
Great Britain and Ireland (1760–1820); also elector (1760–1814) and king
(1814–20) of Hanover. The grandson of GEORGE II, he ascended the throne
during the SEVEN YEARS’ WAR. His chief minister, Lord BUTE, forced WIL-
George
George IV orig. George Augustus Frederick (b. Aug. 12, 1762,
London, Eng.—d. June 26, 1830, Windsor, Berkshire) King of the United
Kingdom (1820–30) and king of Hanover (1820–30). The son of GEORGE
III, he earned his father’s ill will by his extravagances and dissolute hab-
its, contracting a secret marriage that was annulled by his father. In 1811
George became regent for his father, who had been declared insane.
Retaining his father’s ministers rather than appointing his Whig friends,
he saw Britain and its allies triumph over Napoleon in 1815. A patron of
the architect JOHN NASH, he sponsored the restoration of WINDSOR CASTLE.
George V orig. George Frederick Ernest Albert (b. June 3,
George VI orig. Albert Frederick Arthur George (b. Dec. 14,
1895,
Sandringham,
Norfolk,
Eng.—d. Feb. 6, 1952, Sandring-
ham) King of the United Kingdom
(1936–52). The
second son of
GEORGE V, he was proclaimed king
following the abdication of his
brother, EDWARD VIII. He was an
important symbolic leader of the
British people during World War II,
supporting the wartime leadership of
WINSTON CHURCHILL and visiting his
armies on several battlefronts. In
1949 he was formally recognized as
head of the COMMONWEALTH by its
member states. He earned the respect
of his people by scrupulously
observing the responsibilities of a
constitutional monarch and by over-
coming the handicap of a severe stammer. He was succeeded by his
daughter, ELIZABETH II.
George, David Lloyd See David LLOYD GEORGE
752 I Georgia (cid:2) geosyncline
Georgia Country, Transcaucasia, western Asia. Located within the CAU-
CASUS MOUNTAINS, on the southeastern shores of the Black Sea, it includes
the autonomous republics of Abkhazia and Ajaria (Adjara). Area: 27,086 sq
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Georgia Institute of Technology known as Georgia Tech Pub-
igneous rock and regional uplift complete the transformation into a belt
of folded mountains. The concept was introduced by JAMES HALL in 1859
and is basic to the theory of mountain building. See also ANDEAN GEO-
SYNCLINE; APPALACHIAN GEOSYNCLINE; CORDILLERAN GEOSYNCLINE.
gerbil
tral and southern highlands of Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, is now
standard written German, used in administration, higher education, litera-
ture, and the mass media in both High and Low German speech areas.
German measles See RUBELLA
German National People’s Party (DNVP) (1919–33) Radical
German-Soviet Nonaggres-
sion Pact or Nazi-Soviet Non-
Germanic
Germany were united, while the Soviet zone became East GERMANY. It
became a sovereign country and a member of NATO in 1955, though its
occupiers retained military bases. It united with SAARLAND in 1957, and it
joined the UN in 1973. It was reunited with East Germany in October 1990.
germination Sprouting of a SEED, SPORE, or other reproductive body,
usually after a period of dormancy. Absorption of water, passage of time,
chilling, warming, oxygen availability, and light exposure may all oper-
ate in initiating the germination process. The carefully controlled mass
germination of cereal seeds supplies enzymes for the making of alcoholic
beverages and for other industries; spores of the commercially cultivated
mushroom Agaricus brunescens are also mass germinated.
Gérôme
PEAN COAL AND STEEL COMMUNITY, the forerunner of the EUROPEAN UNION. The
Former republic (1949–90), west-central Europe. It consisted of the west-
ern two-thirds of what is now the Federal Republic of GERMANY. It was
formed in 1949 when the U.S., British, and French zones of occupation in
Gerry
Gethsemane
tury the Mande founded the states of Dag-
omba and Mamprussi in the northern half
of the region. The ASANTE (Ashanti), an
Akan people, originated in the central for-
est region and formed a strongly central-
ized empire that was at its height in the 18th–19th century. European
exploration of the region began early in the 15th century, when the Por-
tuguese landed on the Gold Coast; they later established a settlement at
Elmina as headquarters for the SLAVE TRADE. By the mid-18th century the
Gold Coast was dominated by numerous forts controlled by Dutch, Brit-
ish, and Danish merchants. Britain made the Gold Coast a crown colony
in 1874, and British protectorates over the Asante and the northern ter-
ritories were established in 1901. In 1957 the Gold Coast became the
independent state of Ghana. Since independence several political coups
have occurred, but the coup of 1981 produced a government that lasted
into the 1990s and made a smooth transition into another administration
at the beginning of the 21st century.
Ghana empire First of the great medieval trading empires of western
Africa (7th–13th century). Located in what is now southeastern Mauri-
tania and part of Mali, it acted as intermediary between Arab and BERBER
salt traders to the north and gold and ivory producers to the south. Gold
was secured through barter from those living at the empire’s southern limit
and exchanged in the capital for commodities, especially salt. As the
empire grew richer it extended its reach, incorporating gold-producing
southern lands and cities to the north. The king exacted tribute from the
princes of subject tribes. Ghana began to decline with the rise of the Mus-
lim ALMORAVIDs; the Almoravid leader ABU BAKR seized the Ghanaian capi-
tal of Kumbi in 1076. The empire’s subject peoples began to break away,
and in 1240 the empire’s remains were incorporated into the SUNDIATA
empire of Mali.
Ghannouchi
between the Calvinist north (the Union of Utrecht) and the Catholic south
(the Union of Arras). The general union ended in 1584.
Gheorghiu-Dej
giant See GIGANTISM
giant order See COLOSSAL ORDER
giant sequoia See BIG TREE
giant silkworm moth See SATURNIID MOTH
giant star Star with a relatively large radius for its mass and tempera-
ture; this yields a large radiating area, so such stars are bright. Subclasses
include SUPERGIANT STARs, red giants (with low temperatures, but very
bright), and subgiants (with slightly reduced radii and brightness). Some
giants are hundreds of thousands of times brighter than the Sun. Giants
and supergiants may have masses 10–30 times that of the Sun and vol-
umes millions of times greater and are thus low-density stars.
Giap, Vo Nguyen See VO NGUYEN GIAP
Giardia lamblia
of sheer, inaccessible cliffs, which makes it strategically important. It is
the site of a British air and naval base that guards the Strait of GIBRALTAR.
The Moors held Gibraltar from 711 to 1462, and in 1501 it was annexed
by Spain. Captured by the British in 1704, it became a British crown
colony in 1830. Gibraltar was an important port in World Wars I and II.
The sovereignty of the territory has remained a source of constant fric-
tion between the United Kingdom and Spain, though residents voted in
1967 to remain part of Britain. Spain lifted its border blockade in the
mid-1980s. Perhaps its most famous residents are the Barbary macaques,
who occupy many of Gibraltar’s caves and are Europe’s only free-living
monkeys.
Gibraltar, Strait of ancient Fretum Herculeum Channel, con-
Gibran
from the booty and led Israel into immorality. In another version, he
replaced worship of the local deity, BAAL, with that of Yahweh (the God
of Israel), and the power of Yahweh enabled his tribe to destroy the Mid-
ianites.
Gielgud
Gilchrist
Ginsburg, Ruth Bader orig. Ruth Joan Bader (b. March 15,
ginseng
notably the monumental altarpiece The Presentation of Christ in the
Temple (1447–49), 12 scenes from the life of St. John the Baptist, and a
Madonna (1463) altarpiece in Pienza Cathedral. He also painted count-
less other religious panels. His tormented spirituality and expressionistic
style were little appreciated until his reputation was revived in the 20th
century.
Gippsland
Gislebertus
gladiolus
glass, decorative See AMELUNG GLASS, BACCARAT GLASS, BOHEMIAN GLASS,
CAMEO GLASS, CUT GLASS, LUSTERED GLASS, STAINED GLASS, VENETIAN GLASS, WATER-
FORD GLASS
glaucoma
globulin
also HANG GLIDING.
FIREFLIES. Glow-
gloxinia
attached to different carbon atoms. The term is often used for the simplest
of the class, ETHYLENE GLYCOL (1,2-ethanediol). Propylene glycol (1,2-
propanediol), much like ethylene glycol but not toxic, is used extensively
in foods, cosmetics, and oral hygiene products as a solvent, preservative,
and moisture-retaining agent. Other important glycols include 1,3-
butanediol and 1,4-butanediol, used as raw materials for plastics and other
chemicals; 2-ethyl-1,3-hexanediol, an insect repellent; and 2-methyl-2-
propyl-1,3-propanediol, the raw material of the tranquilizer meprobamate.
glycolysis
Go-Daigo
Godden, Rumer in full Margaret Rumer Godden Haynes-
Gödel
1, 1945, Berlin) German Nazi leader. After earning a doctorate from
Heidelberg University, he joined the NAZI PARTY and was appointed district
leader in Berlin by ADOLF HITLER in 1926. A gifted speaker, Goebbels also
edited the party’s journal and began to create the Führer myth around Hit-
ler, instituting the party demonstrations that helped convert the masses to
Nazism. After Hitler seized power in 1933, Goebbels took control of the
national propaganda machinery. During World War II he carried on a per-
sonal propaganda blitz to raise hopes on the home front. Named chancellor
in Hitler’s will, he remained with Hitler to the end. One day after Hitler’s
suicide, Goebbels and his wife killed themselves and their six children.
Goerdeler
goitre Enlargement of the THYROID GLAND, causing a prominent swelling
at the throat. The thyroid can grow to 50 times its normal weight, inter-
fere with breathing and swallowing, and cause a choking feeling. Simple
(endemic) goitre, the most common, is due to low IODINE intake. It and
related conditions result from various defects in thyroid hormone synthe-
sis (hypothyroidism). Advanced cases are treated with thyroid hormone
or surgical removal of the thyroid if it obstructs breathing. The cause of
sporadic goitre, which occurs in areas where iodine intake is more than
adequate, remains a mystery. An enlarged thyroid may have normally
functioning tissue or may produce too much hormone (hyperthyroidism).
See also GRAVES DISEASE.
Golan
776 I Golden Horde (cid:2) Goldmark
Golden Gate Bridge, San Francisco.
GEORGE HALL/WOODFIN CAMP AND ASSOCIATES
golden lion tamarin or golden lion marmoset Species of TAM-
ARIN (Leontideus rosalia), having a thick, lionlike mane, black face, and
long, silky, golden fur. A striking-looking animal, it is found in South
America, where it is listed as critically endangered.
golden ratio/rectangle/section Numerical proportion considered
to be an aesthetic ideal in classical design. It refers to the ratio of the base
to the height of a rectangle or to the division of a line segment into two
in such a way that the ratio of the shorter part to the longer is equal to
that of the longer to the whole. It works out to about 1.61803:1. A rect-
angle constructed from golden sections (segments in this ratio) is called
a golden rectangle.
Golden Temple Punjabi Darbar Sahib or Harimandir Chief
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis).
KITTY KOHOUT/ROOT RESOURCES
Goldfish (Carassius auratus)
W.S. PITT—ERIC HOSKING
Golding, Sir William (Gerald) (b. Sept. 19, 1911, St. Columb
golem
Goldwyn, Samuel orig. Schmuel Gelbfisz later Samuel
Burana is a collection of 13th-century Latin goliard poems and songs;
some were translated by JOHN ADDINGTON SYMONDS as Wine, Women, and
Song (1884), and some were set in a famous cantata by CARL ORFF (1937).
In the 14th century the term came to mean JONGLEUR, or MINSTREL.
Golitsyn, Vasily (Vasilyevich), Prince (b. 1643, Russia—d. May
2, 1714, Kholmogory, Russia) Russian statesman and chief adviser to
SOPHIA Alekseyevna. After commanding in the Ukraine, he served in the
court of FYODOR III and reorganized the Russian army. When Sophia became
regent in 1682, she appointed her lover Golitsyn head of the foreign office.
He negotiated an alliance with Poland (1686) against the Ottoman Turks
but failed in his two campaigns against the Turks (1687, 1689). He also
concluded the Treaty of NERCHINSK with China. In 1689 he was exiled to
Siberia after a coup displaced Sophia and placed PETER I on the throne.
Golitsyn family
landmass, PANGEA, which supposedly began to separate late in the TRIASSIC
PERIOD. Subsequent workers distinguished between a southern landmass,
Gondwana, and LAURASIA to the north. See also CONTINENTAL DRIFT.
Góngora
ern breeding grounds and southern wintering grounds. See also BARNACLE
GOOSE; CANADA GOOSE; GREYLAG; NENE.
GOP See REPUBLICAN PARTY
gopher or pocket gopher Any
of about 40 species (family Geomy-
idae) of stocky RODENTs found in
North and Central America. Gophers
range in length from 5 to 18 in. (13
to 45 cm), including a short, sparsely
haired tail. They have chisel-like
front teeth; long, strong claws on
their forefeet; and large fur-lined
pouches that open externally on each
side of the mouth. Coat colour varies
from almost white to brown or black.
Gophers live alone in extensive,
shallow
underground
burrows
marked by a series of rounded earth
mounds on the surface. They feed on the underground parts of plants,
which they obtain as they tunnel along.
Gorbachev
1779 he organized the Protestant associations formed to secure the repeal
of the Catholic Relief Act (1778). In 1780 he led a mob to Parliament to
present a petition against the act. The ensuing riot lasted a week, causing
great property damage and nearly 500 casualties. Gordon was charged
with, but was acquitted of, high treason. Convicted of libeling the queen
of France in 1787, he was imprisoned in Newgate, where he died.
Gordy, Berry, Jr. See MOTOWN
Gore, Al in full Albert Arnold Gore, Jr. (b. March 31, 1948, Wash-
Gorée
Gorki See NIZHNIY NOVGOROD
Gorky, Arshile orig. Vosdanik Adoian (b. April 15, 1904,
SIONISM.
Gorky, Maksim orig. Aleksey Maksimovich Peshkov (b.
Gorsky, Aleksandr (Alexeyevich) (b. Aug. 18, 1871, St. Peters-
Gortyn
Gosse
Göttingen
Gourmont
Graaff, Robert Van de See Robert J. VAN DE GRAAFF
Grable, Betty orig. Ruth Elizabeth Grable (b. Dec. 18, 1916, St.
Gracchus
gelistic Association in Minneapolis, Minn., and he enjoyed close asso-
ciations with a series of U.S. presidents. Graham and his wife, Ruth, were
awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in 1996.
Graham
gramadevata
Grand Guignol
Trunk eventually became the main rail system of Quebec and Ontario. It
merged with the Great Western Railway (1882) and became part of the
CANADIAN NATIONAL RAILWAYS (1919–23).
grand unified theory or grand unification theory (GUT)
Theory that attempts to unify the electroweak force (see ELECTROWEAK
ACTIONS is sometimes called UNIFIED FIELD THEOR Y. Such theories generally
predict that a PROTON decays into lighter particles. So far, no successful
GUTs have been devised.
Grande, Río See RIO GRANDE
grande école
BATTLE OF CHATTANOOGA in 1864, he
granulite facies
computers many of the same capabilities as the Macintosh. In addition to
being used for operating-system interfaces, GUIs are used in other types
of software, including BROWSERS and application programs.
graphite or plumbago
Graves disease or toxic diffuse goitre or exophthalmic
794 I great auk (cid:2) Great Game
Great Dismal Swamp See DISMAL SWAMP
Great Dividing Range Main watershed of eastern Australia. It com-
prises a series of plateaus and mountain ranges roughly paralleling the
coasts of QUEENSLAND, NEW SOUTH WALES, and VICTORIA, Austl. Beginning
in the north on the Cape York Peninsula, Queen., the range heads south
to become the AUSTRALIAN ALPS near the New South Wales–Victoria border.
Bending west in Victoria, the range ends in the GRAMPIANS, while a south-
ern spur emerges from the BASS STRAIT to form the central uplands of TAS-
MANIA. The range stretches for 2,300 mi (3,700 km). First traversed in 1813
by Europeans moving into the Australian Outback, the region is now
important for agriculture, lumbering, and mining, and national parks
attract tourists.
Great Fear (1789) In the FRENCH REVOLUTION, a period of panic and riot by
peasants and others amid rumors of an “aristocratic conspiracy” by the king
and the privileged to overthrow the THIRD ESTATE. The gathering of troops
around Paris provoked insurrection, and on July 14 the Parisian rabble
seized the BASTILLE. In the provinces the peasants rose against their lords,
attacking châteaux and destroying feudal documents. To check the peas-
ants, the National Constituent Assembly decreed the abolition of the feudal
regime and introduced the DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS OF MAN AND OF THE CITI-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Great Indian Desert See THAR DESERT
TANGANYIKA, and MALAWI.
Great Lakes trout See LAKE TROUT
Great Leap Forward Failed industrialization campaign undertaken
by the Chinese Communists between 1958 and early 1960. MAO ZEDONG
hoped to develop labor-intensive methods of industrialization that would
emphasize manpower rather than the gradual purchase of heavy machinery,
thereby putting to use China’s dense population and obviating the need to
accumulate capital. Rather than large new factories, he proposed develop-
ing backyard steel furnaces in every village. Rural people were organized
into communes where agricultural and political decisions emphasized
ideological purity rather than expertise. The program was implemented so
hastily and zealously that many errors occurred; these were exacerbated by
a series of natural disasters and the withdrawal of Soviet technical person-
nel. China’s agriculture was so disrupted that about 20 million people died
of starvation from 1958 to 1962. By early 1960 the government began to
repeal the Great Leap Forward; private plots were returned to peasants and
expertise began to be emphasized again.
Great Mosque See MASJID-I-JAMI
Great Mosque of
EÆfah)n Persian Masjed-e J)mi!
TAGE SITE in 1983.
1964; MEDICARE AND MEDICAID.
Great Trek Emigration of some 12,000–14,000 Boers (see AFRIKANERs)
from Cape Colony (South Africa) between 1835 and the early 1840s, in
rebellion against British policies and in search of fresh pasturelands. The
trek, regarded by Afrikaners as the origin of their nationhood, enabled the
settlers to establish temporary military supremacy over the XHOSA, to pen-
etrate into Natal and the Highveld, and to expand white settlement north
to the Limpopo River. See also ANDRIES PRETORIUS.
Great Victoria Desert Arid region, WESTERN AUSTRALIA and SOUTH AUS-
TRALIA. Lying between GIBSON DESERT on the north and NULLARBOR PLAIN on
the south, it extends east from Kalgoorlie almost to the Stuart Range.
Much of its eastern end is occupied by the Central and North West
Aboriginal reserves. A vast expanse of sand hills, it is crossed by the
Laverton–Warburton Mission Track, which links the mission station in
the Warburton Range with Laverton, 350 mi (560 km) southwest. There
are several national parks and reserves in the area, including the Great
Victoria Desert Nature Reserve and the Nullarbor National Park.
Great Wall of China Chinese Wanli Changcheng
separate, and has produced such massifs as KILIMANJARO and Mount KENYA.
The system’s main branch, the Eastern Rift Valley, is occupied in the north
by the JORDAN RIVER, the DEAD SEA, and the Gulf of AQABA. It continues
south along the RED SEA to several lakes in Kenya. Less obvious in Tan-
zania, with its eastern rim eroded, it continues south to the Indian Ocean
near BEIRA, Mozam. The western branch of the system, the Western Rift
Valley, extends north from the northern end of Lake MALAWI in an arc that
includes lakes RUKWA, TANGANYIKA, KIVU, EDWARD, and ALBERT.
Great Saint Bernard Pass ancient Mons Jovis Pass in the ALPS.
Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve Natural area,
south-central Colorado, U.S. It lies at the eastern edge of the San Luis
Valley along the western base of the SANGRE DE CRISTO MOUNTAINS. Estab-
lished in 1932 as a national monument, the 150,000-acre (60,700-hectare)
region contains some of the highest inland sand dunes in the U.S., with
changing crests that rise to 700 ft (215 m). In 2000 the Great Sand Dunes
National Preserve was created, and after much land acquisition the monu-
ment officially became a national park in 2004.
Great Sandy Desert Wasteland, northern WESTERN AUSTRALIA. It
extends from Eighty Mile Beach on the Indian Ocean eastward into the
NORTHERN TERRITOR Y and from the Kimberley Downs south to the TROPIC OF
CAPRICORN and the GIBSON DESERT. An arid expanse of salt marshes and sand
hills, it roughly coincides with the sedimentary Canning basin. Canning
Stock Route (1,000 mi [1,600 km] long) spans the region from Wiluna
via Lake Disappointment to Halls Creek.
Great Schism See Western SCHISM
great sea otter See SEA OTTER
Great Smoky Mountains National Park National preserve,
eastern Tennessee and western North Carolina, U.S. It is 20 mi (32 km)
wide and extends southwest for 54 mi (87 km) from the Pigeon River to
the Little Tennessee River. Established in 1934 to preserve the U.S.’s last
remaining sizable area of southern primeval hardwood forest, it covers
520,269 acres (210,553 hectares) and contains some of the highest peaks
grebe (cid:2) Greek alphabet
Slavonian, or horned, grebe (Podiceps
auritus)
INGMAR HOLMASEN
Greco, El orig. Doménikos Theotokópoulos (b. 1541, Candia,
Greco-Persian Wars See PERSIAN WARS
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
798 I Greek Civil War (cid:2) Greek religion
letters, all capitals—ideal for monuments; various scripts better suited to
handwriting were later derived from it.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
GREEK RELIGION.
edited it for the rest of his life, becoming known especially for his articu-
lation of antislavery sentiments in the 1850s. After the onset of the Ameri-
can Civil War in 1861, he pursued a politically erratic course. His
unrealized lifelong ambitions for public office culminated in 1872 in an
unsuccessful run for president on the Liberal Republican Party ticket.
Green, Adolph See Betty COMDEN
Green, Hetty orig. Henrietta Howland Robinson (b. Nov. 21,
Green, Julian (Hartridge) or
Julien Green (b. Sept. 6, 1900,
Paris, France—d. Aug. 13, 1998,
Paris) French-born American writer.
Born in France of American parents,
Green lived mostly in France, though
he taught for a few years in the U.S.
Green’s novels are written in French
and are usually set in French provin-
cial towns or in the American South.
In the intense, claustrophobic atmo-
sphere of these novels, neurotic char-
acters engage in obsessive relationships marked by secrecy, guilt, betrayal,
sexual passion, and violence. In 1970 the Académie Française awarded
him its grand prize for literature in appreciation of his masterful French
prose style, which is marked by clarity, precision, and simplicity. Green’s
works were collected in Complete Works, 10 vol. (1954–65).
Green, William (b. March 3, 1873, Coshocton, Ohio, U.S.—d. Nov.
21, 1952, Coshocton) U.S. labour leader, president of the American Fed-
eration of Labor (AFL). He was a coal miner from age 16. He worked
his way up through the union hierarchy and was elected president of the
AFL in 1924, a post he kept until his death. The formation in 1935 of the
Committee for Industrial Organization (CIO), headed by JOHN L. LEWIS, led
to bitter public disputes between the two men, ending in the expulsion of
the CIO from the AFL in 1936. See also AFL-CIO; LABOUR UNION.
Green Bank equation See DRAKE EQUATION
Green Bay City (pop., 2000: 102,313), northeastern Wisconsin, U.S.
Located on the Fox River at Green Bay, an inlet of Lake MICHIGAN, it was
the site of French trading posts from 1634 until the WAR OF 1812. The
U.S. took possession when the army built Fort Howard there in 1816. With
the decline of the fur trade and the opening of the ERIE CANAL, it devel-
oped as a lumbering and agricultural centre. A GREAT LAKES port of entry
with heavy shipping, it has a large wholesale and distributing business.
The city is famous for its professional football team, the Green Bay Pack-
ers, which it has supported since 1919. It is the site of a University of
Wisconsin branch and a technical college.
Green Berets
Greek Revival Architectural style based on 5th-century-BC Greek
temples that spread throughout Europe and the U.S. in the early 19th cen-
tury. The revival was symptomatic of the public’s preoccupation with
Greek culture at the time. Architects often tacked majestic facades with
Grecian columns onto existing buildings; banks and institutions became
imitation Doric temples; and homes
in the Greek Revival style often had
large PORTICOes made up of heavy
PILASTERs and reinterpreted PEDIMENTs.
The BRITISH MUSEUM (1847), utilizing
the Greek Ionic order on a massive
scale, is the most powerful English
example of the style. In the U.S.,
where the style was adopted on a
large scale, many strange distortions
found acceptance. See also NEOCLAS-
SICAL ARCHITECTURE.
Greeley, Horace (b. Feb. 3,
800 I green revolution (cid:2) greenhouse
Greenaway, Kate orig. Catherine Greenaway (b. March 17,
Illustration for “When We Went Out
with Grandmamma” by Kate Green-
away for Marigold Garden, 1885.
MARY EVANS PICTURE LIBRARY, LONDON
also FREE SILVER MOVEMENT, POPULIST MOVEMENT.
ing HELEN FRANKENTHALER, MARK ROTHKO, and DAVID SMITH. He disavowed such
later movements as POP ART and CONCEPTUAL ART and wrote little after the
1960s.
Greenberg, Hank orig. Henry Benjamin Greenberg (b. Jan.1,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Greene, Charles Sumner and Henry Mather (respectively b.
GLOBAL WARMING.
greenhouse effect (cid:2) Greens
Some incoming sunlight is reflected by the Earth’s atmosphere and surface, but
most is absorbed by the surface, which is warmed. Infrared (IR) radiation is then
emitted from the surface. Some IR radiation escapes to space, but some is absorbed
by the atmosphere’s greenhouse gases (especially carbon dioxide, water vapour,
and methane) and reradiated in all directions, some to space and some back
toward the surface, where it further warms the surface and lower atmosphere.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
greenschist facies
Gregory XIII orig. Ugo Buoncompagni (b. June 7, 1502, Bolo-
gna, Romagna—d. April 10, 1585, Rome, Papal States) Pope (1572–85)
who promulgated the GREGORIAN CALENDAR. After teaching at the Univer-
sity of Bologna, he served as a delegate to the Council of TRENT, became
a cardinal in 1565, and was elected pope in 1572. A promoter of the
COUNTER-REFORMATION, he sought to execute the reform decrees of the coun-
cil. He compiled the INDEX LIBRORUM PROHIBITORUM and founded several col-
leges and seminaries, delegating their direction to the Jesuits. Aided by
an astronomer and a mathematician, he corrected the errors in the Julian
calendar and issued the Gregorian calendar (1582), which was later
adopted worldwide.
Gregory, Augusta, Lady orig. Isabella Augusta Persse (b.
IRISH LITERAR Y RENAISSANCE. With WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS, she helped found the
Irish Literary Theatre (1898) and the ABBEY THEATRE (1904). She wrote
many dialect comedies based on Irish peasant life, including those col-
lected in Seven Short Plays (1909). She also translated plays by Molière
and others into an Anglo-Irish dialect that she called “Kiltartan” and
translated and arranged Irish sagas into continuous narratives, published
as Cuchulain of Muirthemne (1902) and Gods and Fighting Men (1904).
Gregory of Nazianzus
sists of Bequia, Canouan, Mayreau, Mustique, Union Island, and
associated islets. Carriacou Island, the largest of the Grenada group, has
an area of 13 sq mi (34 sq km). Rainfall is low, and few of the islands
are inhabited.
Grenfell, Sir Wilfred (Thomason) (b. Feb. 28, 1865, Parkgate,
Grenoble
Greyhound Lines,
Inc. U.S.
corporation that has provided the
major intercity bus transportation in
the U.S. and Canada. It was founded in 1926 as Motor Transit Manage-
ment. Backed by the railroads, the company soon had a network of lines
spreading across the country. It adopted its current name in 1930. By 1933
Greyhound’s routes covered 40,000 mi (65,000 km). In the early 1980s
deregulation of the bus-transit industry led Greyhound to drop many local
bus lines. In 1987 Greyhound Corp. sold its bus operations, and Grey-
hound Lines, Inc., became an independent corporation devoted to inter-
city bus transportation. It was purchased in 1999 by Canada’s Laidlaw
Inc., a waste-management company.
greylag Most common Eurasian representative (Anser anser) of the
so-called gray GOOSE, and ancestor of all Occidental domestic geese. It
nests in temperate regions and winters from Britain to North Africa, India,
and China. It is pale gray with pink legs; the bill is pink in the eastern
race and orange in the western race.
Grieg
Grillparzer
Gromyko
Grotowski
growth hormone (GH) or somatotropin
Guadiana
guano
Guaviare
Guernsey
Guido d’Arezzo
Guinea-Bissau
Guise, Henri I de Lorraine, 3rd duke de (b. Dec. 31, 1550—d.
Dec. 23, 1588, Blois, France) French leader of the Catholic party and the
HOLY LEAGUE during the French Wars of RELIGION. When CATHERINE DE MÉDI-
CIS turned to the Guises in 1572 for help in removing the Huguenot GAS-
PARD II DE COLIGNY, Henri, who blamed Coligny for the murder of his father,
the 2nd duke de GUISE, helped plan the Massacre of SAINT BARTHOLOMEW’S
DAY. Fearing Guise’s growing popularity, HENR Y III made peace with the
Huguenots in 1576, and Guise angrily countered by forming the HOLY
LEAGUE. After Guise’s victory in the War of the THREE HENR YS (1588), Henry
was forced to surrender to the Holy League’s demands, and Guise was
appointed lieutenant general of France. Soon afterward the king’s body-
guard stabbed Guise to death; the next day his brother, Louis II (1555–
88), Cardinal de Guise, was also murdered.
Guise, Henri II de Lorraine, 5th duke de (b. April 4, 1614, Blois,
Guise
See also HERRING GULL; KITTIWAKE.
Gull, Sir William Withey (b.
gum or gingiva
Administration of Corrective Labour Camps) was largely unknown in the
West until the 1973 publication of ALEKSANDR SOLZHENITSYN’s Gulag Archi-
pelago. The Gulag consisted of hundreds of camps, under the control of
the secret police, where prisoners felled timber, worked in the mines, or
laboured on construction projects. At least 10% died each year from harsh
working conditions,
inadequate food, and summary executions. The
Gulag reached its height in the years of collectivization of Soviet agri-
culture (1929–32), during JOSEPH STALIN’s purges (1936–38), and immedi-
ately after World War II, shrinking only after Stalin’s death in 1953. An
estimated 15–30 million Russians died in the camps.
Gulbenkian, Calouste (Sarkis) (b. March 29, 1869, Istanbul,
shops. GUM now includes about 150 shops selling food, clothing, home
appliances, watches and cameras, and many other goods. It functions more
like a Western-style shopping mall than a department store and is a popu-
lar tourist attraction.
gum, chewing See CHEWING GUM
Gum Nebula Largest known emission NEBULA in terms of how much
of the sky it occupies as seen from Earth, extending over about 35° in the
southern constellations Puppis and Vela. A complex of diffuse, glowing
gas too faint to see with the unaided eye, it was discovered in the 1950s.
It lies roughly 1,000 light-years from Earth and may be the remnant of
an ancient SUPERNOVA.
gum tree See TUPELO
Gumal Pass
mainly in Burkina Faso, northern Côte d’Ivoire, northern Ghana, and
northern Togo. Moore in Burkina Faso has the largest number of speak-
ers, more than 6,000,000 (see MOSSI). Once considered a Gur language,
DOGON is spoken by about 600,000 people in Mali; it is of uncertain
affiliation within Niger-Congo.
Gurdjieff
Guthrie, Woody orig. Woodrow Wilson Guthrie (b. July 14,
Guwahati
Gwalior
H-R diagram See HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM
Ha-erh-pin See HARBIN
Haakon IV Haakonsson
Habsburg
hadron
Hagia Sophia
ernize his country and steer it into
the mainstream of African politics.
He brought Ethiopia into the League
of Nations and the UN and made
Addis Ababa the centre for
ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY (now
the African Union). Through most of
his reign he remained popular among
the majority Christian population.
He was deposed in 1974 in a mili-
tary coup by MENGISTU HAILE MARIAM
and kept under house arrest. He was
apparently killed by his captors.
Haile Selassie was regarded as the
Messiah of the African race by the
Rastafarian movement.
Hainan
performed with the Concertgebouw Orchestra in 1956. From 1961 to 1988
he was its permanent conductor, and he left a wide-ranging recorded
legacy. He also had a noteworthy opera career as head of the Glynde-
bourne (1978–88) and Covent Garden (from 1988) operas.
British forces in 1914 was largely due to his planning. He was lord chan-
cellor (1912–15) in H.H. ASQUITH’s government and again (1924) in JAMES
RAMSAY MACDONALD’s Labour Party government.
Haldeman
Halicarnassus
hall)j
halogen
hamm)r
TRENTON AND PRINCETON). He served as
TINENTAL CONGRESS, he argued for a
strong central government. As a del-
egate to the ANNAPOLIS CONVENTION in
1786, he drafted the address that led
to the CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION.
With JAMES MADISON and JOHN JAY, he
Hamito-Semitic languages See AFROASIATIC LANGUAGES
Hamm, Mia orig. Mariel Margaret Hamm (b. March 17, 1972,
Selma, Ala., U.S.) U.S. football (soccer) player. At the age of 15 Hamm
became the youngest person ever to play on the U.S. national soccer team.
In 1989 she entered the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and
there helped her team win four collegiate championships. She also helped
the U.S. team win the World Cup in 1991 and 1999 and the Olympic gold
medal in 1996. She broke the all-time international scoring record for
either men or women on May 16, 1999, against Brazil with her 108th
career goal.
Hammerstein
MERRIMACK. The port cities of NEWPORT NEWS, NORFOLK, and PORTSMOUTH
comprise the Port of Hampton Roads, one of the busiest U.S. seaports.
Hampton Roads Conference (Feb. 3, 1865) Informal and unsuc-
cessful peace talks at Hampton Roads, Va., during the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR.
Pres. ABRAHAM LINCOLN agreed to meet with the Confederate vice president,
ALEXANDER H. STEPHENS, to reach a peace settlement. Lincoln’s terms called
for a reunion of the nation, emancipation of the slaves, and disbanding
of Confederate troops. Since Stephens had been authorized to accept inde-
pendence only, no settlement was reached.
hamster Any of various stout Old World RODENTS (in the family
Muridae) with a short tail, soft fur,
and long cheek pouches for carrying
food. Hamsters are nocturnal and
generally live in burrows; they feed
on fruits, grain, and vegetables,
though some species also eat insects
and other small animals. The com-
mon hamster of Europe and western
Asia is 8–12 in. (20–30 cm) long,
without the 1–2.5-in. (3–6-cm) tail;
its coat is brown above and black
below, with white patches along each
side. The golden hamster of Syria is
a popular pet and is widely used as
a laboratory animal;
is golden
brown with white underparts and
6–8 in. (15–20 cm) long, including
the tail.
Hamsun
Handke
Handel, George Frideric orig. Georg Friedrich Händel (b.
Hangzhou or Hang-chou
Hanukkah
WAR. When Georgia seceded in 1861, Hardee resigned his commission
and assumed command of Confederate forces in northeastern Arkansas,
later demonstrating his military skills at the Battles of SHILOH and CHAT-
TANOOGA. As commander of the military department of South Carolina,
Georgia, and Florida, he attempted to halt the march of WILLIAM T. SHER-
MAN across Georgia. After the war he retired to his plantation.
Harden, Sir Arthur (b. Oct. 12, 1865, Manchester, Eng.—d. June 17,
1940, Bourne, Buckinghamshire) British biochemist. His more than 20
years of study of sugar fermentation advanced knowledge of metabolic
processes in all living forms. In 1929 he shared the Nobel Prize for Chem-
istry with Hans von Euler-Chelpin. He also produced pioneering studies
of bacterial enzymes and metabolism. He was knighted in 1936.
Hardenberg
short tail. Hares in northern latitudes
are white in winter and grayish
brown in summer; elsewhere, they
are usually grayish brown year-
round. Hares are primarily herbivo-
rous.
Hare Krishna movement
Harlequin
Harper, Stephen in full Stephen Joseph Harper (b. April 30,
COURTESY OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER,
GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
Stephen Harper.
Harpers Ferry National Historical Park National preserve, West
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
harp seal (cid:2) Harriman
FROM THE NATIONAL TRUST PROPERTY, FENTON HOUSE,
HAMPSTEAD, LONDON; BY GRACIOUS PERMISSION OF HER
MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH, THE QUEEN MOTHER
Harpsichord with soundboard by Hans
Ruckers, Amsterdam, 1612
for Pres. LYNDON B. JOHNSON, Harriman led the U.S. delegation to the Paris
peace talks with North Vietnam (1968–69).
Harris, Sir Arthur Travers, 1st Baronet (b. April 13, 1892, Chel-
Harris, Roy orig. LeRoy Ellsworth Harris (b. Feb. 12, 1898, near
Harrison, Benjamin (b. Aug.
1833, North Bend, Ohio,
U.S.—d. March 13, 1901,
India-
napolis, Ind.) 23rd president of the
U.S. (1889–93). The grandson of
WILLIAM H. HARRISON, the 9th presi-
Harrison, Sir Rex orig. Reginald Carey Harrison (b. March 5,
ANTHONY WAYNE at
Harrods
its graduates include RICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN, Lord BYRON, SIR ROBERT PEEL,
and WINSTON CHURCHILL.
Harsa or Harsha
ing perception of shapes. He showed how simple retinal mechanisms
constitute vital steps in the integration of visual information. In 1967 he
shared a Nobel Prize with GEORGE WALD and RAGNAR ARTHUR GRANIT.
Hartmann von Aue
Hasdeu
Hathor
Hausa
848 I Hawaiian goose (cid:2) hawthorn
ians made implements of stone, wood, shell, teeth, and bone. They had a
highly developed oral culture and possessed percussion, string, and wind
instruments. Their basic unit of land, the ahupuaa, usually extended from
the shore to the mountaintop, providing the occupants with the means to
grow and gather all they needed. Hawaiians had four principal gods and
many lesser deities. Their laws, which included intricate taboos, bore
heavily upon the people, especially women. After the arrival of Christian
missionaries in 1820, some of the more repressive laws and taboos were
abolished, but the native population was devastated by Western diseases.
Numbering about 300,000 in 1778, full-blooded Hawaiians today num-
ber fewer than 10,000.
Hawaiian goose See NENE
hawk Any of many small to medium-sized, diurnal BIRDS OF PREY, par-
ticularly those in the genus Accipiter.
The term is often applied to other
birds
in the Accipitridae family
(including BUZZARDS, HARRIERS, and
GOSHAWK, SPARROW HAWK.
Red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis).
ALAN CAREY
the EVENT HORIZON of a BLACK HOLE. STEPHEN W. HAWKING proposed in 1974
that SUBATOMIC PARTICLE pairs (PHOTONs, NEUTRINOs, and some massive par-
ticles) arising naturally near the event horizon may result in one particle’s
escaping the vicinity of the black hole while the other particle, of nega-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Coleman Hawkins, c. 1943.
REPRINTED WITH PERMISSION OF DOWN BEAT MAGAZINE
Hawkins, Erick (b. April 23,
hawr al-hamm)r See Lake
hAMM0R
hawthorn Any of various thorny
shrubs or small trees of the genus
Hawthorn (Crataegus)
WALTER CHANDOHA
Haya de la Torre
Hazeltine
and a special ELECTORAL COMMISSION
Gov. JOHN PETER ALTGELD.
Hays Office formally Motion Picture Producers and Distribu-
Hayworth, Rita orig. Margarita Carmen Cansino (b. Oct. 17,
INSURANCE.
health maintenance organization (HMO) Public or private
Heaney
852 I
heart attack (cid:2) heat pump
beat. See also CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM.
Structure of the human heart. Oxygen-rich blood from the lungs enters the heart
through the pulmonary veins, passing into the left atrium and on to the left ventricle.
Contraction of the muscles of the left ventricle forces blood into the aorta. The mitral
valve prevents blood from moving back into the left atrium during contraction. Vari-
ous arteries branch off from the aorta to supply blood to all parts of the body.
Oxygen-poor blood draining from the body into the superior vena cava and infe-
rior vena cava flows to the right atrium, through the tricuspid valve, and into the
right ventricle. As the right ventricle contracts, oxygen-poor blood passes through
the pulmonary valve into the pulmonary arteries and on to the lungs to receive oxy-
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
heart attack or myocardial infarction Death of a section of HEART
muscle when its blood supply is cut off, usually by a blood clot in a coro-
nary artery narrowed by ATHEROSCLEROSIS. HYPERTENSION, DIABETES MELLITUS, high
CHOLESTEROL, cigarette SMOKING, and CORONAR Y HEART DISEASE increase the risk.
heart clam See COCKLE
heart disease Any disorder of the heart. Examples include CORONAR Y
HEART DISEASE, CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE, and PULMONAR Y HEART DISEASE, as well
ARRHYTHMIAs. Some CONNECTIVE TISSUE diseases (notably systemic LUPUS ER YTHE-
MATOSUS, RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS, and SCLERODERMA) can affect the heart. HEART
FAILURE may result from many of these disorders.
heart failure Inability of one or both sides of the HEART to pump enough
blood for the body. Causes include PULMONAR Y HEART DISEASE, HYPERTENSION,
and coronary ATHEROSCLEROSIS. A person with left-sided heart failure expe-
riences shortness of breath after exertion, difficulty in breathing while
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
BOLTZMANN.
COOLING SYSTEM.
heat exhaustion or heat prostration Response of the body to
is generated in the boiler and led to radiators through pipes. The high
temperature of the steam makes it hard to control, and steam heating has
been largely superseded. A common type of electric heating system con-
verts electric current to heat by means of resistors that emit radiant energy.
See also RADIANT HEATING, SOLAR HEATING.
heatstroke Debility caused by exposure to heat and humidity, usually
for many hours, called sunstroke when caused by direct sunlight. Body
temperature is 106–110°F (41–43°C) or higher. Perspiration almost stops,
leading to the rapid temperature rise, collapse, and coma. Cooling with
ice-water baths or packs, with massage to promote circulation, is urgent
to save the victim’s life. Even after body temperature drops, circulatory
disorder and brain damage may cause death. See also HEAT EXHAUSTION.
heaven Dwelling place of God or the gods and the abode of the blessed
dead. The term also refers to the
celestial sphere, the place of the sun,
moon, planets, and stars and the
source of light, which symbolizes
good. For later Judaism and Chris-
tianity, heaven is the destination of
the faithful after a general resurrec-
tion of the dead, in contrast to HELL,
the place of punishment
wicked. Islam has a similar belief. In
Chinese religion, heaven is equated
with the divine will, which guides
the operation of all physical and
moral laws. In some Mahayana Bud-
dhist sects, heaven is a paradise for
those who have received the saving
grace of AMITABHA.
Heaven’s Gate U.S.
in UNIDENTIFIED FLYING
Heaviside
the refrigerant and becomes heated during the process. The liquid refrig-
erant then enters the throttle valve and expands, coming out as a liquid-
vapour mixture at a lower temperature and pressure. It then enters the
evaporator, where the liquid is evaporated by contact with the warmer
space. The vapour then passes to the compressor and the cycle is repeated.
A heat pump is a reversible system and is commonly used both to heat
and to cool buildings. It operates on the same thermodynamic principles
as REFRIGERATION.
Heath, Sir Edward (Richard George) (b. July 9, 1916, Broad-
trees, including AZALEAS, RHODODENDRONS, MOUNTAIN LAUREL, BLUEBERRIES, and
can be delivered by CONVECTION, RADIATION, and THERMAL CONDUCTION. With
the exception of the ancient Romans, who developed a form of central
heating, most cultures relied on direct heating methods such as FIREPLACES
and stoves. Central heating, adopted for use again in the 19th century, is
a method of indirect heating: heat is produced away from the occupants
and then conveyed to them. In warm-air heating, air heated by a furnace
rises through ducts to rooms above, where it is emitted through grills. In
hot-water systems, a pump circulates water from a boiler through a sys-
tem of pipes to radiators or convectors in rooms. In steam systems, steam
heavy water or deuterium
Hebron
Hegelianism
Heine
helioflagellate
Heller, Yom Tov (Lipmann ben Nathan Ha-Levi) (b. 1579,
Helmand River or Helmund
hemangioma
Henan
Henrietta Maria French Henriette-Marie (b. Nov. 25, 1609, Paris,
Henry I known as Henry Beauclerc
Henry VII orig. Henry Tudor, earl of Richmond (b. Jan. 28,
Henry VII German Heinrich (b.
Henry V (cid:2) Henry
THE BRIDGEMAN ART LIBRARY/NATIONAL MUSEUMS AND
GALLERIES ON MERSEYSIDE (WALKER ART GALLERY,
LIVERPOOL)
Henry VIII, oil on panel by the studio of
Hans Holbein the Younger, after 1537;
in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool,
England.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Henry, Saint See HENR Y II (GERMANY)
Henry Beauclerc See HENR Y I (ENGLAND)
Henry of Anjou See HENR Y II (ENGLAND)
Henry Plantagenet See HENR Y II (ENGLAND)
Henry the Navigator Portuguese Henrique o Navegador
orig. Henrique, infante (prince) de Portugal, duque (duke)
de Viseu, senhor (lord) da Covilha (b. March 4, 1394, Porto,
Port.—d. Nov. 13, 1460, Vila do Infante, near Sagres) Portuguese prince
and patron of explorers. He helped his father, JOHN I, capture the Moroc-
can city of Ceuta in 1415 and served as governor of Ceuta and later of
the Portuguese province of Algarve. He established his own court at
Sagres and sponsored voyages of discovery in the Madeira Islands and
along the western coast of Africa. As grand master of the Order of Christ,
he gained funds for backing voyages aimed at the conversion of pagans.
His patronage led to the development of the Portuguese caravel and
improved navigational instruments and the advancement of cartography.
Henry Tudor See HENR Y VII (ENGLAND)
Henson, Jim in full James Maury Henson (b. Sept. 24, 1936,
Henze
rowed by THOMAS SHERATON and DUNCAN PHYFE.
heptathlon Women’s athletics competition. Contestants take part in
seven different TRACK-AND-FIELD events: 100-m hurdles, SHOT PUT, HIGH JUMP,
LONG JUMP, JAVELIN THROW, and 200- and 800-m runs. The two-day event
replaced the women’s PENTATHLON in the Olympic Games after 1981.
Hepworth, Dame (Jocelyn) Barbara (b. Jan. 10, 1903, Wake-
Heracleitus
herbivore
major types of hermeneutics have emerged: literal (asserting that the text
is to be interpreted according to the “plain meaning”), moral (seeking to
establish the principles from which ethical lessons may be drawn), alle-
gorical (interpreting narratives as having a level of reference beyond the
explicit), and anagogical or mystical (seeking to explain biblical events
as they relate to the life to come). More recently the word has come to
refer to all “deep” reading of literary and philosophical texts.
Hermes
told by OVID and was treated by CHRISTOPHER MARLOWE in his play Hero and
Leander and by Lord BYRON in The Bride of Abydos.
Herod known as Herod the Great (b. 73 BC—d. March/April, 4 BC,
Jericho, Judaea) Roman-appointed king of JUDAEA (37–4 BC). A practicing
Jew, he was of Arab origin. He was critical to imperial control of Judaea,
despite his earlier support of Mark ANTONY, and the Roman emperor
increased his territory. Judaea prospered under his early reign, during
which he increased trade and built fortresses, aqueducts, and theatres, but
he could not give full rein to his desire to build and thrive because he
feared the PHARISEEs, Judaism’s controlling faction, who viewed him as a
foreigner. He lost favour through increasing cruelty, manifest in the mur-
der of his wife, her sons, and other relatives. His grip on his kingdom
weakened as he became increasingly mentally unstable and physically
debilitated. He killed his eldest son, and he slew the infants of Bethlehem
(see JESUS). He died shortly after a bungled suicide attempt.
Herod Agrippa I
Herriot
Hertzog
Hesse
SS, becoming SS chief for Berlin (1934), head of the Reich Security Cen-
tral Office (1939), and HEINRICH HIMMLER’s chief deputy. Noted for his ruth-
lessness against “enemies of the state,” in the early years of World War
II he organized mass executions in the German-occupied territories and
became known as “the Hangman.” In 1942 he chaired the WANNSEE CON-
FERENCE. Appointed deputy administrator of Bohemia and Moravia, he was
assassinated by Czech patriots; in retaliation the Gestapo demolished the
village of Lidice and executed its male population of about 200.
Heyerdahl
Hidalgo
Hickok, Wild Bill orig. James Butler Hickok (b. May 27, 1837,
Hicks, Sir John R(ichard) (b. April 8, 1904, Leamington Spa, War-
wickshire, Eng.—d. May 20, 1989, Blockley, Gloucestershire) British
economist. He taught at several institutions, notably the University of
WRITING, phonetic hieroglyphs denoted consonants, not syllables, so there
was no regular way to write vowels; by convention, Egyptologists insert
the vowel e between consonants in order to pronounce Egyptian words.
The standardized orthography of the Middle Kingdom (2050–1750 BC)
employed about 750 hieroglyphs. In the early centuries AD, use of hiero-
glyphs declined—the last dated text is from AD 394—and the meaning of
the signs was lost until their decipherment in the early 19th century (see
J.-F. CHAMPOLLION; ROSETTA STONE). The term hieroglyph has been applied
to similar systems of writing, notably a script used to write the ancient
ANATOLIAN LANGUAGE Luvian and a script used by the Maya (see MAYAN
HIEROGLYPHIC WRITING).
hierophant
hij)z, Al- See HEJAZ
Hijrah
Hilliard
Hindu Kush
thorough training on viola, violin, clarinet, and piano. He became con-
certmaster of the Frankfurt Opera at age 20, and his compositions began
drawing attention at new-music festivals. Because his wife was Jewish
and his music was considered “degenerate” by the Nazis, he left Germany
in 1938, settling in the U.S. in 1940. Advocating Gebrauchsmusik (“use-
ful music”), he wrote solo sonatas and concertos for many of the standard
orchestral instruments. Mathis der Maler (1935) is the best known of his
six operas; the symphony based on it, and the Symphonic Metamorpho-
sis on Themes of Weber (1943), are widely performed.
Hindenburg, Paul von in full Paul Ludwig Hans Anton von
Beneckendorff und von Hin-
hip-hop See RAP
Hipparchus or Hipparchos
Hiroshima
Hitler Youth German Hitler-Jugend
Ho Chi Minh orig. Nguyen Sinh Cung (b. May 19, 1890, Hoang
Tru, Viet.—d. Sept. 2, 1969, Hanoi) President (1945–69) of the Democratic
Republic of Vietnam (North Vietnam). Son of a poor scholar, he was
brought up in a rural village. In 1911 he found work on a French steamer
and traveled the world, then spent six years in France, where he became a
socialist. In 1923 he went to the Soviet Union; the next year he went to
China, where he started organizing exiled Vietnamese. He founded the
Indochina Communist Party in 1930 and its successor, the VIET MINH, in
1941. In 1945 Japan overran Indochina, overthrowing its French colonial
rulers; when the Japanese surrendered to the Allies six months later, Ho and
his Viet Minh forces seized the opportunity, occupied Hanoi, and pro-
claimed Vietnamese independence. France refused to relinquish its former
colony, and the First INDOCHINA WAR broke out in 1946. Ho’s forces defeated
the French in 1954 at Dien Bien Phu, after which the country was parti-
tioned into North and South Vietnam. Ho, who ruled in the north, was soon
embroiled with the U.S.-backed regime of NGO DINH DIEM in the south in
what became known as the VIETNAM WAR; North Vietnamese forces pre-
vailed over the south six years after Ho’s death.
Ho Chi Minh City formerly Saigon
for his comparative studies of social development. He sought to correlate
social change with its contribution to the general advance of the commu-
nity, focusing especially on the intellectual, moral, and religious elements
of change. He joined the staff of the Manchester Guardian (1897) and
continued to write for the newspaper after leaving to teach sociology at
the London School of Economics (1904–29). Among his works are Mor-
als in Evolution (1906), The Rational Good (1921), and Elements of Social
Justice (1922).
Hockney, David (b. July 9, 1937, Bradford, Eng.) British painter,
draftsman, printmaker, photographer, and stage designer. He studied at
the Bradford College of Art and the Royal College of Art in London. In
the mid 1960s he taught at the Universities of Iowa, Colorado, and Cali-
fornia, and in 1978 he settled permanently in Los Angeles. His portraits,
self-portraits, still lifes, and quiet scenes of friends are characterized by
economy of technique, preoccupation with light, bright colours, and a
frank, mundane realism derived from POP ART and photography. The Cali-
fornia swimming pool became one of his favourite themes. A brilliant
draftsman and printmaker, he published series of etchings, including illus-
trations for Six Fairy Tales of the Brothers Grimm (1969). In the 1970s
he achieved prominence as a set designer for the opera and ballet. He
later experimented with photography and photocollage, and still later with
computer technology and printers.
Hodges, Johnny orig. John Cornelius Hodges (b. July 25, 1906,
Hodgkin, Dorothy M(ary) orig. Dorothy Mary Crowfoot (b.
Hodgkin disease or
lymphoreticuloma
tion with vivid examinations of human character. Hoffmann also worked
as a conductor, music critic, and theatrical musical director. The most
successful of his many original musical works were the ballet Arlequin
(1811) and the opera Undine (performed 1816). He died at age 46 of pro-
gressive paralysis. His stories inspired notable operas and ballets by
JACQUES OFFENBACH (Tales of Hoffmann), LÉO DELIBES (Coppélia), PYOTR
TCHAIKOVSKY (The Nutcracker), and PAUL HINDEMITH (Cardillac).
Hoffmann
Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst
holding company Corporation
886 I Holley (cid:2) Holocaust
MARSHALL WARREN NIRENBERG and HAR GOBIND KHORANA.
Holliday, Doc orig. John Henry Holliday (baptized March 21,
Hollweg, Theobald von Bethmann See Theobald von BETHMANN
HOLLWEG
holly Any of approximately 400 species of red- or black-berried orna-
mental shrubs and trees that make up
the genus Ilex (family Aquifoli-
aceae), including the popular Christ-
hollies. English
holly
aquifolium) bears shiny, spiny, dark,
evergreen leaves; American holly (I.
opaca) has oblong, prickly leaves;
both have usually red fruits. There
spineless
and yellow-fruited
forms of both species.
Holly, Buddy orig. Charles
American holly (Ilex opaca)
© NOBLE PROCTOR FROM THE NATIONAL AUDUBON
SOCIETY COLLECTION/PHOTO RESEARCHERS
Hollyhock (Althaea rosea)
LEFEVER/GRUSHOW FROM GRANT HEILMAN
PHOTOGRAPHY, INC.
Hanya Holm, 1929.
COURTESY OF THE DANCE COLLECTION, THE NEW YORK
PUBLIC LIBRARY AT LINCOLN CENTER, HANYA HOLM
COLLECTION
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Holocene
Holy Spirit or Holy Ghost or Paraclete In Christianity, the third
Holy Synod
Homestead National Monument Memorial,
hominid
homosexual rights movement See GAY RIGHTS MOVEMENT
Homyel
honeysuckle family Family
Hong Kong Chinese Xianggang
Hongze Lake Chinese Hongze Hu or Hung-tse Hu
brother of HORACE EVERETT HOOPER, publisher of ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA.
Hoorn Islands See FUTUNA ISLANDS
the HOOVER COMMISSION.
Hoover, J(ohn) Edgar (b. Jan. 1,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
J. Edgar Hoover
AP/WIDE WORLD PHOTOS
Hooker (cid:2) Hope diamond
hop, step, and jump See TRIPLE
Hope, Bob orig. Leslie Townes
GRANT HEILMAN
Hop vine (Humulus lupulus) with female
flowers (cones), which are used in
brewing.
Hopeh See HEBEI
Hopewell
culture
Mound Builders Most notable
formerly
WOODLAND CULTURE.
hoplite
Hornbostel
servatory and made his debut in 1921. His stunning technique gained him
a large international reputation, and he became an inveterate touring per-
former, giving 100 concerts a year in the U.S. alone. In 1933 he married
ARTURO TOSCANINI’s daughter, Wanda. Always susceptible to nervous strain,
in 1953 he decided to quit public performance; his return to the concert
stage in 1965 was attended by great publicity. He favoured the works of
Romantics such as ROBERT SCHUMANN, FRÉDÉRIC CHOPIN, FRANZ LISZT, and his
friend SERGEY RACHMANINOFF. He continued to perform into his 80s.
horror story Story intended to elicit a strong feeling of fear. Such tales
are of ancient origin and form a substantial part of folk literature. They
may feature supernatural elements such as GHOSTs, witches, or VAMPIREs or
address more realistic psychological fears. In Western literature, the lit-
erary cultivation of fear and curiosity for its own sake emerged in the
18th century with the GOTHIC NOVEL. Classic practitioners of the horror and
gothic genres include HORACE WALPOLE, MAR Y SHELLEY, E.T.A. HOFFMANN,
EDGAR ALLAN POE, Sheridan Le Fanu (1814–73), WILKIE COLLINS, BRAM STOKER,
AMBROSE BIERCE, and STEPHEN KING.
External features of a horse.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
horror story (cid:2) horseshoe pitching
PREAKNESS STAKES, and BELMONT STAKES. See also STEEPLECHASE.
horsehair worm or hairworm or gordian worm Any of about
Horseshoe crab (Limulus polyphemus).
RUNK/SCHOENBERGER FROM GRANT HEILMAN
Horthy
Hottentot See KHOIKHOI
Houdini
house sparrow or English sparrow One of the world’s best-
900 I
house sparrow (cid:2) Houston
known and most abundant small
birds
(Passer domesticus,
family
Passeridae or Ploceidae). It lives in
towns and on farms worldwide, hav-
ing accompanied Europeans from its
original home in Eurasia and north-
ern Africa. Introduced into North
America in 1852, it spread across the
continent within a century. It is about
6 in. (15 cm) long and buffy-brown;
the male has a black bib. House spar-
rows breed nearly year-round in
warm regions. See also SPARROW.
House Un-American Activi-
ties Committee (HUAC) Com-
House sparrow (Passer domesticus)
ERIC HOSKING
mittee of the U.S. House of Representatives, established in 1938 under
MARTIN DIES as chairman, that conducted investigations through the 1940s
and ’50s into alleged communist activities. Those investigated included
many artists and entertainers, including the HOLLYWOOD TEN, ELIA KAZAN,
PETE SEEGER, BERTOLT BRECHT, and ARTHUR MILLER. RICHARD NIXON was an active
Housefly (Musca domestica) on a
doughnut
AVRIL RAMAGE—© OXFORD SCIENTIFIC FILMS LTD.
including CHOLERA, DYSENTER Y, and
Houseman, John orig. Jacques Haussmann (b. Sept. 22, 1902,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Houston
(pop.,
2000:
1,953,631), southern Texas, U.S. An
inland port, it is linked by the Hous-
ton Ship Channel
to the Gulf of
A.E. Housman, detail of a drawing by
William Rothenstein, 1906; in the
National Portrait Gallery, London.
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY,
LONDON
MEXICO and to the GULF INTRACOASTAL WATERWAY at GALVESTON. Founded in
Sam Houston, photograph by Mathew
Brady
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, WASHINGTON, D.C.
Hovenweep
Howe, William Howe, 5th Viscount (b. Aug. 10, 1729—d. July
12, 1814, Plymouth, Devonshire, Eng.) British military commander. The
brother of Adm. Richard Howe, he fought in the last FRENCH AND INDIAN
WAR (1754–63), in which he earned a reputation as one of the army’s
most brilliant young generals. In the AMERICAN REVOLUTION, he succeeded
Thomas Gage as supreme commander of British forces in North America
in 1776. He soon captured New York City and the surrounding area, and
in 1777 he led British troops to victories at the Battles of the BRANDYWINE
and of GERMANTOWN. Moving his forces to Philadelphia, he left troops
under JOHN BURGOYNE vulnerable in New York state, thus contributing to
the British defeat at the Battles of SARATOGA. He resigned in 1778 and was
succeeded by HENR Y CLINTON.
Howe Caverns Cavern system, east-central New York, U.S. Located
west of ALBANY and named for Lester Howe, who discovered them in 1842,
the limestone caves have grotesque rock formations and underground
channels. Elevators and boat rides are available. A second group, Secret
Caverns, with underground waterfalls and fossilized marine life, is nearby.
Howel Dda See HYWEL DDA
Hoxha
Hsüan-hsueh See XUANXUE
Hsüan-tsang See XUANZANG
Hsüan Tsung See XUANZONG
Hsün-tzu See XUNZI
HTML in full HyperText Markup Language MARKUP LANGUAGE
derived from SGML that is used to prepare HYPERTEXT documents. Relatively
easy for nonprogrammers to master, HTML is the language used for docu-
ments on the WORLD WIDE WEB. The text coding consists of commands
contained in angle brackets <> that affect the display of elements such as
titles, headings, text, font style, colour, and references to other documents,
which can be interpreted by an Internet BROWSER according to style rules.
HTTP in full HyperText Transfer Protocol Standard application-
Hu, Sia, and Heh
Hubei
Canada. It remained a large fur-collecting and marketing agency until
1991, with extensive real-estate interests and many department stores.
Hugo Award or Science Fiction Achievement Award Any of
Huguenots
Hull (cid:2) human sacrifice
erectus and modern humans, H. heidelbergensis may have been an ances-
tor of modern humans and also of the NEANDERTHALs (H. neanderthalen-
sis), who inhabited Europe and western Asia from c. 200,000 to 28,000
years ago. Fully modern humans (H. SAPIENS) seem to have emerged in
Africa only c. 150,000 years ago, perhaps having descended directly from
H. erectus or from an intermediate species such as H. heidelbergensis.
human factors engineering See ERGONOMICS
human growth hormone See GROWTH HORMONE
human immunodeficiency virus See HIV
GENETICS; HOMO SAPIENS; PERSONALITY; PHILOSOPHICAL ANTHROPOLOGY; SOCIOBIOL-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
908 I
humanism (cid:2) Hume
Humanities, National Endowment for the See NATIONAL
ENDOWMENT FOR THE HUMANITIES
Humboldt,
(Friedrich Wil-
helm Heinrich) Alexander,
Freiherr (baron) von (b. Sept.
14, 1769, Berlin, Prussia—d. May 6,
1859, Berlin) German naturalist and
explorer. In 1792 he joined the min-
ing department of the Prussian gov-
ernment, where he invented a safety
lamp and established a technical
school for miners. From 1799 he
explored Central and South America,
traveling in the Amazon jungles and
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Alexander von Humboldt, oil painting
by Friedrich Georg Weitsch, 1806; in
the National Museums in Berlin.
COURTESY OF THE STAATLICHE MUSEEN ZU BERLIN
Humboldt, (Karl) Wilhelm, baron von (b. June 22, 1767, Pots-
Humboldt University of Berlin See University of BERLIN
adopt UTILITARIANISM. With JOHN LOCKE and GEORGE BERKELEY, Hume is
regarded as one of the great philosophers of EMPIRICISM.
Hume, John (b. Jan. 18, 1937, Londonderry, N.Ire.) Leader of the
Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) in Northern Ireland from
1979 to 2001 and corecipient with DAVID TRIMBLE of the Nobel Prize for
Peace in 1998. A schoolteacher, Hume became a Roman Catholic leader
in the Northern Ireland civil rights movement in the 1960s. He was elected
to the parliaments of Northern Ireland (1969), Europe (1979), and Brit-
ain (1983). A moderate, he condemned the use of violence by the IRISH
REPUBLICAN ARMY (IRA). In the late 1980s he attempted to persuade the IRA
to abandon the armed struggle against Britain and enter democratic poli-
tics. He risked his personal safety to engage in sometimes secret dialogues
with leaders of SINN FÉIN, the IRA’s political wing, and he played a lead-
ing role in negotiating the Good Friday Agreement, the multiparty peace
accord between unionists and nationalists reached in April 1998. Elected
to the new Northern Ireland Assembly in June, he resigned his seat two
years later because of ill health.
humidity Amount of water vapour in the air. One of the most variable
characteristics of the atmosphere, humidity is an important factor in cli-
mate and weather: it regulates air temperature by absorbing thermal radia-
tion both from the Sun and the Earth; it is directly proportional to the
latent energy available for the generation of storms; and it is the ultimate
source of all forms of condensation and precipitation. Humidity varies
because the water-holding capacity of air is determined by temperature.
When a volume of air at a given temperature holds the maximum amount
of water vapour possible, the air is said to be saturated. Relative humid-
ity is the water-vapour content of the air relative to its content at satura-
tion. Saturated air has a relative humidity of 100%; near the Earth the
relative humidity rarely falls below 30%.
Hummel
910 I Hundred Days (cid:2) Hünkâr rskelesi
Hundred Years’ War (1337–1453)
Hung Hsiu-ch’üan See HONG XIUQUAN
Hung-shan culture See HONGSHAN CULTURE
Hung-shui River See HONGSHUI RIVER
Hung T’ai-chi See HONGTAIJI
Hung-tse Hu See HONGZE LAKE
Hung-wu emperor See HONGWU EMPEROR
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Hunkers and Barnburners Two factions of the New York state
Democratic Party in the 19th century. The party split over slavery in the
1840s. The conservative Hunkers (so called by their opponents as those
who “hunkered” or “hankered” after political office), led by WILLIAM
MARCY, favoured the annexation of Texas and denounced antislavery agi-
tation. The radical and reformist Barnburners (so called by their oppo-
nents as those who burned the barn to get rid of the rats), led by MARTIN
VAN BUREN, opposed slavery’s extension into new territories. At the 1848
Democratic national convention, the Barnburners joined the FREE SOIL
PARTY, nominating Van Buren for president. In the 1850s some Barnburn-
ers returned to the Democratic Party while others joined the new Repub-
lican Party.
Hunt, H(aroldson) L(afayette) (b. Feb. 17, 1889, Ramsey, Ill.,
JENNER.
Hunter, William (b. May 23, 1718, Long Calderwood, Lanarkshire,
Scot.—d. March 30, 1783, London, Eng.) British obstetrician, educator,
and medical writer. The brother of JOHN HUNTER, he studied medicine at
the University of Glasgow and became a licensed physician in London
in 1756. He introduced the French practice of providing individual medi-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Hunkers and Barnburners (cid:2) Huntington
hunting and gathering society Any human society that depends
Hunyadi
Hussite
Huygens
Hyderabad
hydrogen bomb or H-bomb or thermonuclear bomb Weapon
hydrogenation
Hyksos
HyperText Markup Language See HTML
HyperText Transfer Protocol See HTTP
hypnosis State that resembles SLEEP but is induced by a person (the hyp-
notist) whose suggestions are readily accepted by the subject. The hyp-
notized individual seems to respond in an uncritical, automatic fashion,
ignoring aspects of the environment (e.g., sights, sounds) not pointed out
by the hypnotist. Even the subject’s memory and awareness of self may
be altered by suggestion, and the effects of the suggestions may be
extended (posthypnotically) into the subject’s subsequent waking activ-
ity. The history of hypnotism is as old as that of sorcery and magic. It was
popularized in the 18th century by FRANZ ANTON MESMER (as “mesmerism”)
and was studied in the 19th century by the Scottish surgeon James Braid
(1795–1860). SIGMUND FREUD relied on it in exploring the UNCONSCIOUS, and
it eventually came to be recognized in MEDICINE and PSYCHOLOGY as useful
in helping to calm or anesthetize patients, modify unwanted behaviours,
and uncover repressed memories. There remains no generally acceptable
explanation for hypnosis, though one prominent theory focuses on the
possibility of discrete dissociative states affecting portions of CONSCIOUS-
NESS.
hypochondriasis
be performed after CESAREAN SECTION in cases of complications such as
uncontrolled bleeding, gross infection, or pelvic cancer.
hysteresis
I Am movement U.S. religious movement founded in the 1930s by Guy
Ballard (1878–1939) and his wife, Edna (1886–1971). They taught that the
Mighty I Am is the source of power in everything, a power available to
individuals through a number of Ascended Masters, including Jesus.
Another important Ascended Master, St. Germain, spoke to Guy Ballard at
Mount Shasta in northern California and revealed Ballard’s many previous
lives. The movement suffered a setback when Guy died in 1939 and another
when Edna and her son were indicted for fraud in 1940; though the indict-
ment was set aside in 1946, the movement had by then lost its vitality.
I-ch’ang See YICHANG
I Ching See YIJING
I-pin See YIBIN
Iacocca
Ibiza
Ibn Sln) See AVICENNA
Ibn ’aymiyyah
A typical professional North American ice-hockey rink. U.S. college rinks are usually wider (100 ft), and international rinks
vary in both length and width. Blue lines mark the respective off-sides areas; the space between them is called the neutral zone.
The puck is put into play by being dropped between two players at the face-off spots; all players except those facing off must
stand outside the face-off circle. A major penalty requires that a player go to the penalty box for five minutes while his team
plays shorthanded.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
consisting of U.S. and Canadian pro-
fessional
teams, was organized in
1917. Hockey was introduced at the Olympic Games in 1920. It is a very
aggressive game, and the puck is often taken from a player by means of
a hit to the body, called a check. Some contact, such as checking from
behind and slashing with the stick, is illegal and draws a penalty. See also
STANLEY CUP.
924 I
ice formation (cid:2) Icelandic language
timing and unison. Unlike FIGURE
SKATING, ice dancing does not allow
movements of strength or technical
skill
(particularly overhead lifts,
jumps, and spins of more than one-
and-a-half rotations). It has been an
Olympic event since 1976.
ice formation Any mass of ice
that occurs on the Earth’s continents
or surface waters. Such masses form
wherever substantial amounts of liq-
uid water freeze and remain in the
solid state for some period of time.
Examples include glaciers, icebergs,
sea ice, and ground ice associated
with PERMAFROST.
sity. The NATIONAL HOCKEY LEAGUE,
Icelanders’ sagas or family sagas Class of heroic prose narra-
tives written in the 13th century about the great families who lived in
Iceland from 930 to 1030. They represent the zenith of classical Icelan-
dic SAGA writing and are far in advance of any contemporary medieval
literature in their realism, controlled style, character delineation, and over-
whelming tragic dignity. Their artistic unity, length, and complexity sug-
gest that they were written by individual
authors rather than composed orally. Jus-
tice, not courage, is often the primary vir-
tue, as in the greatest of the family sagas,
NJÁLS SAGA.
Icelandic language National language of Iceland, one of the GER-
MANIC LANGUAGES. It developed from the Norse speech brought to Iceland
by settlers from western Norway in the 9th–10th centuries. Old Icelandic
(see OLD NORSE) is the language of the SAGAs and other medieval poems.
In grammar, vocabulary, and spelling, modern Icelandic is the most con-
servative of the Scandinavian languages; modern Icelanders can still read
Old Norse sagas. Icelandic once borrowed words from Danish, Latin, and
the Celtic and Romance languages, but a purist movement that began in
the early 19th century has replaced most of these loanwords with words
formed only from Icelandic elements.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Ichikawa
Iditarod
iguana
recognized ijtih)d, and jurists considered learned enough for this kind of
analysis have great authority. In the 20th century an attempt was made to
restore ijtih)d among Sunnites to help Islam adapt to the modern world.
Ike Taiga
Illyria
IMMUNOLOGY.
NOLOGY; LEUKOCYTE; RETICULOENDOTHELIAL SYSTEM.
immunity In law, exemption or freedom from liability. Under interna-
tional treaty, a diplomatic representative is exempt from local laws, both
civil and criminal. In many countries, judges, legislators, and government
officials, including the heads of state, enjoy limited or absolute immunity
at home to protect them from personal liability for wrongful acts or omis-
sions that arise from the performance of their duties. A public prosecutor
may grant immunity from prosecution to a witness who is suspected of
criminal activity in return for testimony against other suspected criminals.
immunodeficiency Defect in IMMUNITY that impairs the body’s ability
to resist infection. The IMMUNE SYSTEM may fail to function for many rea-
sons. Immune disorders caused by a genetic defect are usually evident
early in life. Others can be acquired at any age through infections (e.g.,
AIDS) or IMMUNOSUPPRESSION. Aspects of the immune response that may be
affected include LYMPHOCYTES, other LEUKOCYTES, ANTIBODIES, and COMPLEMENT.
of ALLERGIES, IMMUNOSUPPRESSION after organ TRANSPLANTS to prevent rejection,
and study of AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES and IMMUNODEFICIENCIES. AIDS has stimu-
post. See also TESTING MACHINE.
impala
built, the impala stands 30–40 in. (75–100 cm) high at the shoulder. It has
a golden to reddish brown coat, white underparts, a vertical black stripe
on each thigh, and a black tuft behind each hind hoof. The male has long,
lyre-shaped horns.
impatiens
French painting; it was disliked by Debussy himself. Elements often
termed impressionistic include static harmony, emphasis on instrumental
timbres that creates a shimmering interplay of “colours,” melodies that
lack directed motion, surface ornamentation that obscures or substitutes
for melody, and an avoidance of traditional musical form. Impressionism
can be seen as a reaction against the rhetoric of ROMANTICISM, disrupting
the forward motion of standard harmonic progressions. The other com-
poser most often associated with Impressionism is MAURICE RAVEL. Impres-
sionistic passages are common in earlier music by FRÉDÉRIC CHOPIN, FRANZ
LISZT, and RICHARD WAGNER, and in music by later composers such as CHARLES
IVES, BÉLA BARTÓK, and GEORGE GERSHWIN.
in vitro fertilization (IVF)
OF UNITS; MEASUREMENT; METRIC SYSTEM.
In’ch£n
934 I
India rubber plant (cid:2) Indian Ocean
varying mixtures of ethnic strains
drawn from peoples settled in the
subcontinent before the dawn of his-
tory or from invaders. Languages:
Hindi, English (both official), and
other
Indo-European
languages,
including Bengali, Kashmiri, Mar-
athi, and Urdu; DRAVIDIAN LANGUAGES;
the GANGES
the HIMALAYAS,
India rubber plant See RUBBER PLANT
Indian licorice See ROSAR Y PEA
Indian Mutiny or Sepoy Mutiny (1857–58) Widespread rebellion
against British rule in India begun by Indian troops (sepoys) in the ser-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Indian National Congress or Congress Party Broadly based
political party of India, founded in 1885. The Congress Party was a mod-
erate reform party until 1917, when it was taken over by its “extremist”
Home Rule wing (see BAL GANGADHAR TILAK). In the 1920s and ’30s, under
MOHANDAS K. GANDHI, it promoted noncooperation to protest the feeble-
ness of the constitutional reforms of 1919. During World War II, the party
announced that India would not support the war until granted complete
independence. In 1947 an Indian independence bill became law, and in
1950 the constitution took effect. JAWAHARLAL NEHRU dominated the party
from 1951 to 1964. The Indian National Congress formed most of India’s
governments from 1947 to 1996, but at the end of the 20th century, its
support plummeted. After several years out of power, it returned to gov-
ernment in 2004.
Indian Ocean Body of salt water stretching between Africa in the west,
Australia in the east, Asia in the north, and Antarctica in the south. With
an area of 28,360,000 sq mi (73,440,000 sq km), it covers approximately
one-seventh of the Earth’s surface, and it is the smallest of the world’s
three major oceans (see ATLANTIC OCEAN; PACIFIC OCEAN). Its greatest depth
(24,442 ft [7,450 m]) is in the Java Trench. Its chief marginal seas include
the RED SEA, ARABIAN SEA, PERSIAN GULF, ANDAMAN SEA, Bay of BENGAL, and
contributions to ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY.
ern Oklahoma. The CHOCTAW, CREEK, SEMINOLE, CHEROKEE, and CHICKASAW
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Indian paintbrush (cid:2) Indies
GUAGEs.
ever instituted for a colonial empire, and it set forth humane (if often
ignored) principles for treatment of Indians.
Indigenismo
Indonesian language See MALAY LANGUAGE
Indore
Indo-European languages Family of languages with the greatest
number of speakers, spoken in most of Europe and areas of European
settlement and in much of southwestern and southern Asia. They are
descended from a single unrecorded language believed to have been spo-
ken more than 5,000 years ago in the steppe regions north of the Black
Sea and to have split into a number of dialects by 3000 BC. Carried by
migrating tribes to Europe and Asia, these developed over time into sepa-
rate languages. The main branches are ANATOLIAN, Indo-Iranian (including
INDO-AR YAN and IRANIAN), GREEK, ITALIC, GERMANIC, ARMENIAN, CELTIC, ALBA-
NIAN, the extinct TOCHARIAN LANGUAGES, BALTIC, and SLAVIC. The study of
Indo-Gangetic Plain See GANGETIC PLAIN
Indochina or Indochinese Peninsula Region of mainland SOUTH-
938 I
induction heating (cid:2) Indus River
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
industrial and organizational relations or organizational
industrial medicine or occupational medicine Branch of medi-
cine dealing with workers’ health and the prevention and treatment of
diseases and injuries in the workplace. Workplace hazards include expo-
sure to dangerous materials including asbestos and coal dust, radiation
exposure, and machinery capable of causing injuries ranging from minor
to life-threatening.
Industrial medical programs mandate protective
devices around machines’ moving parts, proper ventilation of work areas,
use of less toxic materials, containment of production processes, and pro-
tective equipment and clothing. Good industrial medical programs
improve labour-management relations, increase workers’ overall health
and productivity, and reduce insurance costs.
industrial melanism
and maintenance services; education and teaching; and health, social wel-
fare, administrative, police, security, and defense services.
also DEFLATION, PRICE INDEX.
inflorescence
ink Fluid or paste of various colours (usually black or dark blue) used
for writing and PRINTING, composed of a PIGMENT or DYE in a liquid “vehicle.”
Early inks used lampblack (a form of CARBON) or coloured juices, extracts,
or suspensions of plant, animal, and mineral substances. Modern writing
inks usually contain ferrous sulfate (see IRON) with a small amount of an
acid; on paper, they darken and bond, becoming permanent. Coloured and
washable inks usually contain soluble synthetic dyes. Printing inks are
formulated for various requirements (including colour, opacity, fade resis-
tance, pliability, odourlessness, drying behaviour, and health and environ-
mental safety) for uses in OFFSET, LETTERPRESS, screen, ink-jet, laser, and other
printing.
Inkatha
work of EDGAR DEGAS, PIERRE-AUGUSTE
RENOIR, and PABLO PICASSO.
inheritance tax. See also INHERITANCE TAX; INTESTATE SUCCESSION; PROBATE.
competitive inhibition). See also ALLOSTERIC CONTROL, FEEDBACK INHIBITION,
REPRESSION.
Inniskilling See ENNISKILLEN
rnönü
insectivore
the national level, the president, as leader of the party, typically selected the
party’s next presidential candidate—thus effectively choosing his own suc-
cessor. Pres. ERNESTO ZEDILLO broke from that tradition in 1999, and the fol-
lowing year opposition candidate VICENTE FOX won the presidency, although
the PRI maintained control of several state governments.
instrumentalism or experimentalism Philosophy advanced by
Insull
cians who introduced them (FOURIER TRANSFORM, LAPLACE TRANSFORM).
integrated circuit (IC) or microcircuit or chip or microchip
Integrated Services Digital Network See ISDN
integument
With precision equipment, large numbers of identical parts could be pro-
duced at low cost and with a small workforce. See also AMERICAN SYSTEM
OF MANUFACTURE; ARMOUR Y PRACTICE; AUTOMOBILE industry; FACTOR Y; HENR Y FORD;
HENR Y LELAND.
intercontinental ballistic missile See ICBM
and the LIQUIDITY-PREFERENCE theory of JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES, according to
interferon
PROBLEM.
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) international organi-
948 I
intermediate-range nuclear weapons (cid:2) International Court of Justice
intermediate-range nuclear weapons Class of NUCLEAR WEAPONS
International, Communist See FIRST INTERNATIONAL, SECOND INTERNA-
TIONAL, COMINTERN
GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION.
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) International orga-
nization officially founded in 1957 to promote the peaceful use of NUCLEAR
ENERGY. Based in Vienna, its activities include research on the applicabil-
ity of nuclear energy to medicine, agriculture, water resources, and indus-
try; provision of
technical assistance; development of
radiation
safeguards; and public relations programs. Following the FIRST PERSIAN GULF
WAR, IAEA inspectors were called on to certify that Iraq was not manu-
facturing nuclear weapons. The IAEA and its director general, Mohamed
ElBaradei, were awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace in 2005.
International Bank for Economic Cooperation (IBEC) Inter-
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(IBRD) Main component organization of the WORLD BANK. The IBRD
lends money to middle-income and creditworthy poorer countries. Most
of its funds come from sales of bonds in international capital markets.
More than 180 countries are members of the IBRD. Each member’s vot-
ing power is linked to its capital subscription; the U.S., with some one-
sixth of the shares in the IBRD, has veto power over any proposed changes
to the bank. See also INTERNATIONAL MONETAR Y FUND; UNITED NATIONS DEVEL-
OPMENT PROGRAMME.
International Court of Justice
(ICJ) or World Court Principal
“The Internationals—United with the
Spaniards We Fight the Invader,”
poster by Parrilla, published by the
International Brigades, 1936–37.
COURTESY OF THE ABRAHAM LINCOLN BRIGADE
ARCHIVES, BRANDEIS UNIVERSITY LIBRARY
the LEAGUE OF
Cross section showing one cylinder of a four-stroke internal-combustion engine. In
the first stroke (shown), a cam (left) compresses a valve spring, opening the intake
valve to admit the fuel-air mixture to the cylinder. Both valves then close, the mixture
is compressed by the piston, and current is sent to the spark plug. Ignited by the
spark plug, the burning mixture forces the piston down, producing power to turn
the crankshaft and run the car. Another cam (right) opens the exhaust valve and the
burned exhaust gases exit.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Agency of the U.S. Department of
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
International Criminal Court (cid:2) International Refugee Organization
Council. Its 15-member body of judges, each of whom serves a nine-year
term, is elected by countries party to the court’s founding statute. No two
judges may come from the same country. See also EUROPEAN COURT OF JUS-
TICE.
International Criminal Court (ICC) Permanent judicial body estab-
international exchange See FOREIGN EXCHANGE
International Harvester Co. See NAVISTAR INTERNATIONAL CORP.
International Herald Tribune Daily newspaper published in Paris.
It has long been the staple source of English-language news for Ameri-
can expatriates, tourists, and businesspeople in Europe. Its roots are in the
Paris Herald (established 1887); a merger in 1924 between its parent, the
New York Herald, and the New York Tribune created the New York Herald-
Tribune and the Paris Herald Tribune. The Paris edition, which was far-
ing well at the time of its parent’s demise in 1966, was renamed when it
was rescued by a joint venture of the New York Times, the Washington
Post, and Whitney Communications. The New York Times Co. and the
Washington Post Co. became half-owners of the paper in 1991. The New
York Times Co. became the full owner in 2003.
International Labour Organization (ILO) Specialized agency of
International Ladies’ Garment Workers’ Union (ILGWU)
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
tection of nationals abroad. International courts, such as the INTERNATIONAL
COURT OF JUSTICE, resolve disputes on these and other matters, including
WAR CRIMEs. See also ASYLUM; IMMUNITY.
International Monetary Fund (IMF) Specialized agency of the
STRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT; WORLD BANK.
international organization Institution drawing membership from
at least three states, having activities in several states, and whose mem-
bers are held together by a formal agreement. Only a few existed before
1850; several thousand were active in the early 21st century. Some are
intergovernmental (e.g., the UNITED NATIONS), and some are nongovern-
mental (e.g., AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL). Some have multiple worldwide or
regional purposes (e.g., the EUROPEAN UNION), and some have single pur-
poses (e.g., the World Intellectual Property Organization). One effect of
their proliferation is a stronger sense of interdependence among states,
which in turn has stimulated recognition of the need for cooperation to
address international and global problems.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Orga-
sions for its BALANCE OF PAYMENTS.
International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) Set of symbols intended
International Refugee Organization (IRO) Temporary special-
ized agency of the UNITED NATIONS system (1946–52). The IRO assisted
refugees and displaced persons in Europe and Asia who could not or
would not return home after World War II. Taking over the work of its
principal predecessor, the UNITED NATIONS RELIEF AND REHABILITATION ADMINIS-
TRATION, it also assumed responsibility for the legal protection and resettle-
ment of
refugees previously carried out by the Intergovernmental
Committee on Refugees. It was succeeded by the Office of the UNITED
NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES.
applied ornamentation. WALTER GROPIUS, Ludwig MIES VAN DER ROHE, and LE
CORBUSIER are among the architects most clearly associated with the style.
See also BAUHAUS.
International System of Units or Système International
d’Unités
International Space Station (ISS) Space station assembled from
International Standard Book Number (ISBN) Ten-digit num-
Internet Protocol address (cid:2) Interpol
International System of Units*
(Basic Units)
LENGTH
Number of Meters
1,000
0.001
0.000001
Approximate U.S. Equivalent
0.62 mile
328.08 feet
32.81 feet
39.37 inches
3.94 inches
0.39 inch
0.039 inch
0.000039 inch
Number of Square Meters
Approximate U.S. Equivalent
1,000,000
10,000
0.0001
VOLUME
0.3861 square miles
2.47 acres
119.60 square yards
0.155 square inch
Number of Cubic Meters
Approximate U.S. Equivalent
0.001
0.000001
CAPACITY
Number of Liters
1,000
0.001
0.000001
MASS AND WEIGHT
Number of Grams
1,000,000
1,000
0.001
0.000001
1.307 cubic yards
61.023 cubic inches
0.061 cubic inch
cubic
Approximate U.S. Equivalent
liquid
1.31 cubic yards
3.53 cubic feet
0.35 cubic foot
61.02 cubic inches
61.02 cubic inches
6.1 cubic inches
0.61 cubic inch
0.061 cubic inch
0.000061 cubic inch
2.84 bushels
1.14 pecks
0.908 quart
0.908 quart
0.18 pint
2.64 gallons
1.057 quarts
1.057 quarts
0.21 pint
0.338 fluid ounce
0.27 fluid dram
0.00027 fluid dram
Approximate U.S. Equivalent
1.102 short tons
2.2046 pounds
3.527 ounces
0.353 ounce
0.035 ounce
1.543 grains
0.154 grain
0.015 grain
0.000015 grain
kilometer
hectometer
dekameter
meter
decimeter
centimeter
millimeter
micrometer
square kilometer
hectare
square centimeter
cubic meter
cubic decimeter
cubic centimeter
Abbreviation
Abbreviation
sq km or km2
sq cm or cm2
Abbreviation
cu cm or cm3 also cc
Abbreviation
kiloliter
hectoliter
dekaliter
liter
cubic decimeter
deciliter
centiliter
milliliter
microliter
metric ton
kilogram
hectogram
dekagram
decigram
centigram
milligram
microgram
Abbreviation
*For metric equivalents of U.S. units, see Weights and Measurements table
Internet Protocol address See IP ADDRESS
Internet service provider (ISP) Company that provides INTERNET
connections and services to individuals and organizations. For a monthly
fee, ISPs provide computer users with a connection to their site (see DATA
TRANSMISSION), as well as a log-in name and password. They may also pro-
vide software packages (such as BROWSERs), E-MAIL accounts, and a personal
WEB SITE or home page. ISPs can host Web sites for businesses and can
also build the Web sites themselves. ISPs are all connected to each other
through network access points, public network facilities on the Internet
backbone.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
intestine See LARGE INTESTINE, SMALL INTESTINE
intif)Fah
Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) (1887–1995) First REGU-
Inverness
nonpublic company. See also BANK; CENTRAL BANK; SAVINGS BANK; SECURITY.
WAX CASTING, DIE CASTING.
investment credit or investment tax credit Tax incentive that
investment trust or closed-end trust Financial organization that
included the epics of HOMER and the earliest elegiac and iambic poetry.
They began the study of geography, philosophy, and historiography in the
6th century. After Alexander the Great their literary language was the basis
of KOINE, or “common speech,” the language of practically all Greek writ-
ing to the present day.
Ionian
Iqaluit
1258. The OTTOMAN EMPIRE took control in the 16th century and ruled until
the British occupied the country during World War I (1914–18). The Brit-
ish created the kingdom of Iraq in 1921 and occupied Iraq again during
World War II (1939–45). The monarchy was restored following the war,
but a revolution caused its downfall in 1958. Following a series of mili-
tary coups, the socialist BA!TH PARTY, eventually led by ÍADD0M hUSSEIN, took
control and established totalitarian rule in 1968. The IRAN-IRAQ WAR in the
1980s and the First PERSIAN GULF WAR in 1990–91 caused extensive death
and destruction. The economy languished under a UN economic embargo
imposed on Iraq in the 1990s. The embargo began to erode by the early
21st century, and in 2003, during the Second PERSIAN GULF WAR, the Ba!th
Party was driven from power.
Irbid Town (pop., 1994: 208,329), northern Jordan. Built on Early
Bronze Age settlements, it may have been the biblical city of Beth Arbel
and the Arbila of the ancient DECAPOLIS. Modern Irbid is one of Jordan’s
industrial areas and an agricultural centre. The many springs in the area,
in addition to the YARMãK RIVER, provide water for irrigation. It is the home
of YarmHk University.
Iredell
Ireland, Northern See NORTHERN IRELAND
Irenaeus
underjaw, and the colours include gray, brindle, red-brown, black, and
white. The dog is valued as a gentle, even-tempered companion.
Irkutsk
MILLINGTON SYNGE, and SEAN O’CASEY. See also ABBEY THEATRE.
Irish Potato Famine (1845–49) Famine that occurred in Ireland when
the potato crop failed in successive years. By the early 1840s almost half
the Irish population, particularly the rural poor, was depending almost
entirely on the potato for nourishment. A reliance on only one or two
high-yielding varieties made the crop vulnerable to disease, including the
late blight fungus, which ruined the crop. The British government pro-
vided minimal relief to the starving Irish, limited to loans and soup kitch-
ens. The famine was a watershed in Ireland’s demographic history: more
than a million people died from starvation or famine-related diseases, and
perhaps as many as 1.5 million emigrated to North America and Britain.
Population continued to decline thereafter, and by independence in 1921
the Irish population was barely half of the 8.4 million it had been before
the famine.
Irish Rebellion See EASTER RISING
Irish wolfhound Tallest of all
the BATTLESHIP. See also MONITOR.
Iroquoian
Irtysh
dalous reports about her private life, and her arbitrary political interfer-
ence led to the Revolution of 1868, which drove her into exile. She
abdicated in favour of her son, ALFONSO XII.
Isabella Farnese
Isidore of Sevilla, Saint (b. c. 560, Cartagena or Sevilla, Spain—d.
April 4, 636, Sevilla; canonized 1598; feast day April 4) Spanish prelate
and scholar, last of the Western Fathers of the Church. He became arch-
bishop of Sevilla c. 600 and presided over several councils that shaped
church policy, including the fourth Council of TOLEDO (633). He also pro-
moted the conversion of the VISIGOTHs from ARIANISM to orthodox Chris-
tianity. His best-known work was Etymologies, an encyclopedia that
became a standard reference work in the Middle Ages. He also wrote
theological works, biographies, and treatises on natural science, cosmol-
ogy, and history. He was canonized in 1598 and declared a Doctor of the
Church in 1722.
isinglass See MUSCOVITE
narrow DEEP-SEA TRENCH.
Ism)!ll
Isonzo
Mosque of Süleyman, and the Blue Mosque. Its educational institutions
include the University of Istanbul (founded 1453), Turkey’s oldest uni-
versity.
Isthmian Games
SHIMON PERES, and YITZHAK RABIN.
Israeli, Isaac ben Solomon or Isaac the Elder (b. 832/855,
Istanbul formerly Constantinople ancient Byzantium City and
seaport (pop., 2000: 8,803,468), Turkey. Situated on a peninsula at the
entrance to the BLACK SEA, Turkey’s largest city lies on either side of the
BOSPORUS and thus is located in both Europe and Asia. Byzantium was
founded as a Greek colony in the 8th century BC. Passing to the Persian
Achaemenian dynasty in 512 BC and then to ALEXANDER THE GREAT, it became
a free city under the Romans in the 1st century AD. The emperor CON-
STANTINE I made the city the seat of the Eastern Roman Empire in 330, later
naming it Constantinople. It remained the capital of the subsequent BYZ-
ANTINE EMPIRE after the fall of Rome in the late 5th century. In the 6th–13th
centuries it was frequently besieged by Persians, Arabs, Bulgars, and
Russians. It was captured by the Fourth CRUSADE (1203) and turned over
to Latin Christian rule. It was returned to Byzantine rule in 1261. In 1453
it was captured by the OTTOMAN EMPIRE and made the Ottoman capital.
When the Republic of Turkey was founded in 1923, the capital was moved
to ANKARA, and Constantinople was officially renamed Istanbul in 1930.
Many of the city’s historic sites are located in the medieval walled city
(Stamboul). Among its architectural treasures are the HAGIA SOPHIA, the
Italian Popular Party (PPI) formerly (until 1993) Christian
Italian Socialist Party (PSI) since 1998 Italian Democratic
Italic
torial debut, The Funeral (1984), was acclaimed for its satire of social
conventions, a novelty in Japanese cinema. He became an international
success with his artful and entertaining Tampopo (1986) and A Taxing
Woman (1987). His satire on Japan’s crime syndicate, The Gangster’s
Moll (1992), provoked a near-deadly attack on him by gangsters.
Itanagar
Ivanov
ence for intercollegiate gridiron football dating to the 1870s. It consists
of HARVARD, YALE, PRINCETON, COLUMBIA, BROWN, and CORNELL universities, the
University of PENNSYLVANIA, and DARTMOUTH COLLEGE.
IWW See INDUSTRIAL WORKERS OF THE
WORLD
Izabal
Jabal al-Shaykh See Mount HERMON
Jabal River or Baer al-Jabal
972 I
Jackson, C. (cid:2) Jackson, R.
Jackson, Jesse (Louis) orig. Jesse Louis Burns (b. Oct. 8, 1941,
Greenville, S.C., U.S.) U.S. civil
rights leader. He became involved
with the CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT as a col-
lege student. In 1965 he went
Selma, Ala., to march with MARTIN
LUTHER KING, JR., and began working
for King’s SOUTHERN CHRISTIAN LEADER-
HAROLD WASHINGTON. In 1984 and
Jesse Jackson, 1988.
© DENNIS BRACK/BLACK STAR
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Jackson, Joe in full Joseph Jefferson Jackson known as Sho-
Mahalia Jackson, 1961.
THE BETTMANN ARCHIVE
Jackson, Reggie in full Reginald Martinez Jackson (b. May
Jackson, Stonewall orig. Thomas Jonathan Jackson (b. Jan.
YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK.
Jacob
Jacopo da Pontormo See Jacopo da PONTORMO
Jacopo della Quercia
Jaguaribe
sighted by CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS in 1494;
Spain colonized it in the early 16th century
but neglected it because it
lacked gold
reserves. Britain gained control in 1655,
and by the end of the 18th century Jamaica had become a prized colonial
possession because of the volume of sugar produced by slave labourers.
Slavery was abolished in the late 1830s, and the plantation system col-
lapsed. Jamaica gained full internal self-government in 1959 and became
an independent country within the British COMMONWEALTH in 1962. In the
late 20th century the government, led by MICHAEL MANLEY, nationalized
many businesses.
Jamaica Bay Inlet of the Atlantic Ocean. It occupies about 20 sq mi
(50 sq km) along the southwestern shore of LONG ISLAND, in southeastern
New York, U.S. Part of the Port of New York, it is sheltered on the south
by Rockaway Peninsula and connects with the ocean through Rockaway
Inlet. Near the entrance channel is CONEY ISLAND. On the northeastern
shore, at Idlewild, is the John F. Kennedy International Airport.
Jam)l al-Dln al-Afgh)nl
CHARLES SANDERS PEIRCE to assert that
the meaning of any idea must be ana-
lyzed in terms of the succession of
experiential consequences to which it
leads and that truth and error depend
solely on these consequences (see
PRAGMATISM). He applied this doctrine
to the analysis of change and chance,
freedom, variety, PLURALISM, and nov-
elty. His pragmatism was also the
basis for his polemic against MONISM,
the idealistic doctrine of internal rela-
tions, and all views that presented
reality as a static whole. He was also
a leader of the psychological move-
ment known as FUNCTIONALISM.
William James
COURTESY OF THE HARVARD UNIVERSITY NEWS SERVICE
James I Spanish Jaime known as James the Conqueror (b. Feb.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
James I (cid:2) James River
James Edward, the Old Pretender orig. James Francis
Edward Stuart (b. June 10, 1688, London, Eng.—d. Jan. 1, 1766,
Rome, Papal States) Claimant to the English and Scottish thrones. Son of
the exiled JAMES II of England, he was raised in France as a Catholic. On
the death of his father (1701), he was proclaimed king of England by the
French king LOUIS XIV, but the English Parliament passed a bill of attain-
der against him. He served with the French army in the War of the SPAN-
ISH SUCCESSION. In the JACOBITE uprising (1715), James landed in Scotland,
but within two months the uprising collapsed and he returned to France.
He lived thereafter in Rome under the pope’s patronage. He became
known as the “Old Pretender” to distinguish him from his son, CHARLES
EDWARD, THE YOUNG PRETENDER.
James the Conqueror See JAMES I (ARAGON)
James the Just See JAMES II (ARAGON)
the COLONIAL NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK.
Japanese crab See KING CRAB
Japurá
are HOKKAIDO, HONSHU,
TOMI HIDEYOSHI, and TOKUGAWA IEYASU. During the Edo (TOKUGAWA) period
University
of North Carolina
(Greensboro) from 1947 until his
death. As a critic, he revitalized the
reputations of ROBERT FROST, WALT
WHITMAN, and WILLIAM CARLOS WILL-
IAMS in the 1950s; his criticism is col-
lected in Poetry and the Age (1953),
A Sad Heart at
the Supermarket
(1962), and the posthumous Third
Book of Criticism (1969). His poems
appeared in Little Friend, Little
Friend (1945) and Losses (1948),
both drawing on his wartime experi-
ences, and such later collections as
The Seven-League Crutches (1951)
and The Woman at the Washington
Zoo (1960). He was killed when he
stepped in front of a moving car.
Jarrett, Keith (b. May 8, 1945,
Allentown, Pa., U.S.) U.S. JAZZ pia-
nist, composer, and bandleader. He
played with ART BLAKEY (1965–66) and
with Miles Davis’s jazz-rock group
(1970–71) before making a series of
solo recordings that won him broad
popularity. His trio (from 1966) with
bassist Charlie Haden (b. 1937) and
drummer Paul Motian (b. 1931), later
expanded to a quartet (1971–76), was
highly regarded. By the 1980s his
public
performance
turned
mainly to classical recitals.
Jarry
Jaspers
Jaxartes River See SYR DAR YA
Jaya, Mount
Jayavarman
Jellicoe, John Rushworth Jellicoe, 1st Earl (b. Dec. 5, 1859,
Jellinek
naut. In 1992 she spent more than a week aboard the space shuttle Endeav-
our. After leaving NASA in 1993, she taught environmental studies at
Dartmouth College.
jen See REN
Jena and Auerstedt
Jerusalem Hebrew Yerushalayim
mar, 7 vol. (1909–49), Language: Its Nature, Development, and Origin
(1922), and The Philosophy of Grammar (1924). He originated Novial,
an international language.
jester See FOOL
Jesuit
It is bordered by BIHAR, WEST BENGAL, ORISSA, CHHATTISGARH, and UTTAR
PRADESH states and occupies 28,833 sq mi (74,677 sq km); its capital is
Ranchi. The state lies mainly on the Chota Nagapur Plateau, a series of
plateaus, hills, and valleys. Many aboriginal peoples live there. The area
now constituting Jharkhand was a part of Bihar state after Indian inde-
pendence in 1947 until it was made into a separate state in 2000. It is rich
in minerals (notably copper), although most of the population is engaged
in agriculture.
Jhelum
campaign with which the French
army began operations
in 1914
against Germany, but he shifted his
forces and created a new French
army under his direct command that
won a great victory in the First Battle
of the MARNE (1914). As commander
in chief (1915–16), he ordered the
French armies to burst through the
German positions, at ruinous cost.
His prestige waned, and, because of
the lack of French preparation for the
Battle of VERDUN (1916), he was
stripped of his direct command and
resigned. He was created a marshal
of France in 1916.
Joffrey, Robert orig. Abdullah
Jaffa Bey Khan (b. Dec. 24,
J§gan
(1242) and supported a cultural revival from his capital at Nicaea, pav-
ing the way for the eventual reestablishment of the Byzantine Empire.
Venerated by his people, he was canonized in the Eastern church.
John III Sobieski
ports on the western African coast to supply slaves for Brazilian planta-
tions, and he led a Dutch army in 1665 in the ANGLO-DUTCH WARS.
John of Aviz See JOHN I (PORTUGAL)
John of Brienne
Johnson
994 I
Johnson, L. (cid:2) Johnson, W.
Johnson, Magic orig. Earvin Johnson, Jr. (b. Aug. 14, 1959,
ence of LUDWIG MIES VAN DER ROHE
Johnson, Rafer (Lewis)
Aug. 18, 1935, Hillsboro, Texas,
U.S.) U.S. decathlete. While a stu-
dent at UCLA, he won the decathlon
gold medal
the 1955 Pan-
Rafer Johnson, putting the shot in the
Olympic decathlon, 1960
AP/WIDE WORLD PHOTOS
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Johnson, Samuel known as Dr. Johnson (b. Sept. 18, 1709,
Johnson, Sir William, 1st Baronet (b. 1715, Smithtown, County
Johore
Jomini
Jones, Jim orig. James Warren Jones (b. May 13, 1931, near
Lynn, Ind., U.S.—d. Nov. 18, 1978, Jonestown, Guyana) U.S. leader of a
NEW RELIGOUS MOVEMENT. He became a preacher in Indianapolis. He estab-
lished the People’s Temple, which was affiliated with the Disciples of
Christ and opposed racism and poverty. The group moved to San Fran-
cisco in 1971. Accused of defrauding church members, Jones led his group
to Guyana in 1977 and set up the agricultural commune of Jonestown,
using threats and force to control his followers. In 1978 U.S. Congress-
man Leo Ryan went to Jonestown to investigate allegations against Jones.
Ryan and four others were killed when they reached the airport to return
to the U.S. In the aftermath, most of the Jonestown residents, in a mass
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Jones, E. (cid:2) Jones, W.
rite of murder-suicide, were shot or poisoned; Jones died of a gunshot
wound. The death toll was 913, including many children.
Jones, John Paul orig. John Paul (b. July 6, 1747, Kirkbean, Kirk-
cudbright, Scot.—d. July 18, 1792,
Paris, France) American naval hero.
He went to sea at age 12 and became
a ship’s master at age 21. He joined
his brother in Virginia in 1775. When
the AMERICAN REVOLUTION began, he
John Paul Jones, portrait by Charles
Willson Peale, 1781.
COURTESY OF THE INDEPENDENCE NATIONAL HISTORICAL
PARK COLLECTION, PHILADELPHIA
Jones, Mary Harris orig. Mary Harris known as Mother Jones
Jones, Quincy orig. Quincy Delight Jones, Jr. (b. March 14,
as COUNT BASIE, SARAH VAUGHAN, and DINAH WASHINGTON. In the early 1960s
Jones, Spike orig. Lindley Armstrong Jones (b. Dec. 14, 1911,
to encourage Asian studies and published scholarly works on Hindu and
Muslim law. His proposition (1786) that there was a common source for
languages ranging from Celtic to Sanskrit led to recognition of the INDO-
EUROPEAN LANGUAGE family.
jongleur
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Jordan (cid:2) Joséphine
Joseph II, Holy Roman emperor, detail
of a painting by Pompeo Batoni, 1769;
in the Kunsthistorisches Museum,
Vienna
COURTESY OF THE KUNSTHISTORISCHES MUSEUM, VIENNA
Joseph, Father orig. François-Joseph le Clerc du Tremblay
LEON’s brother JOSEPH BONAPARTE.
Joséphine orig. Marie-Josèphe-Rose Tascher de la Pagerie
(b. June 23, 1763, Trois Ilets, Mart.—d. May 29, 1814, Malmaison,
MARIE-LOUISE.
Josephus
Though the lances were blunted, knights were often seriously wounded or
killed. Tournaments were mounted only by royalty and nobility; ladies of
the court would sponsor individual knights, for whom jousting became a
ritual of COURTLY LOVE. Characterized by striking panoply and pageantry,
jousting tournaments represented the preeminent display of CHIVALR Y.
Jove See JUPITER
Joyce, James (Augustine Aloysius) (b. Feb. 2, 1882, Dublin,
Joyner, Florence Griffith See Florence GRIFFITH JOYNER
Joyner-Kersee, Jackie orig. Jacqueline Joyner (b. March 3,
Jubba River
through the application of pressure to arm joints or the neck. Judo is now
practiced primarily as sport. It became an Olympic sport in 1964; wom-
en’s judo was added in 1992. The sport evolved out of JUJITSU in late-19th-
century Japan.
juge d’instruction
of the SUPREME COURT. See also JUDGMENT, JUDICIAR Y, MAGISTRATE’S COURT, MIS-
SOURI PLAN.
DECLARATOR Y JUDGMENT; DEMURRER.
the SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES in MARBUR Y V. MADISON (1803). Sev-
eral constitutions drafted in Europe and Asia after World War II incorpo-
rated judicial review. Especially subject to scrutiny in the U.S. have been
actions bearing on civil rights (or CIVIL LIBERTY), DUE PROCESS of law, EQUAL
PROTECTION under the law, freedom of religion, FREEDOM OF SPEECH, and rights
of PRIVACY. See also CHECKS AND BALANCES.
land, and LEON TROTSKY and other leaders were jailed. The reorganized gov-
ernment was overthrown by the Bolsheviks in October.
July Plot or Rastenburg Assassination Plot Abortive attempt
Junayd
Julian, George W(ashing-
(b. May 5, 1817, Wayne
county, Ind., U.S.—d. July 7, 1899,
Irvington, Ind.) U.S. politician. He
was admitted to the bar in 1840 and
practiced law in several
Indiana
towns. By the mid-1840s he was a
Whig member of the Indiana state
legislature and a frequent author of
antislavery
newspaper
articles.
Elected to the U.S. House of Repre-
sentatives as a member of the FREE
SOIL PARTY in 1848, he was that par-
ty’s vice-presidential candidate in
1852. In 1856 he helped form the REPUBLICAN PARTY. Again serving in the
House (1861–71), he played an important role in making emancipation a
Northern war aim in the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR. In 1867 he helped prepare
articles of impeachment against Pres. ANDREW JOHNSON. He later wrote
books and articles on reform causes, including women’s suffrage.
Julian Alps Range of the eastern ALPS. It extends southeast from the Car-
nic Alps in northeastern Italy to the city of LJUBLJANA, Slvn. The highest peak
is Triglav (9,396 ft [2,864 m]), also the highest point in Slovenia.
Julian of Norwich or Juliana of Norwich (b. 1342, probably
Norwich, Norfolk, Eng.—d. after 1416) English mystic. After being
healed of a serious illness (1373), she wrote two accounts of her visions;
her Revelations of Divine Love is remarkable for its clarity, beauty, and
profundity. She spent her later life as a recluse in Norwich.
Juliana (Louise Emma Marie Wilhelmina) (b. April 30, 1909,
Juneau
Jupiter Dolichenus
Jutland Danish Jylland
Justinian I orig. Petrus Sabbatius (b. 483, Tauresium,
K2 or Dapsang
act as intermediaries between humans and the gods. Each tribe has its
own kachinas, which are believed to reside with a tribe for half of each
year. They can be seen by the community if men properly perform a ritual
while wearing kachina masks. The spirit depicted on the mask is thought
to be actually present with the performer, temporarily transforming him.
Kachinas are also represented by small wooden dolls, carved and deco-
rated by the men of the tribe.
Kaczynski
east, it forms the boundary between Tanzania and Uganda before empty-
ing into Lake Victoria. It is about 250 mi (400 km) long.
kagura
Kalacuri
death, violence, sexuality, and, paradoxically, with motherly love. Noted
for killing the demon Raktavija, she is usually depicted as a hideous,
black-faced hag smeared with blood. In her four hands she holds, vari-
ously, a sword, a shield, the severed head of a giant, or a noose for stran-
gling. Nearly naked, she wears a garland of skulls and a girdle of severed
hands. She is often shown standing or dancing on her husband, SHIVA. Until
the 19th century the thugs of India worshiped Kali and offered their vic-
tims to her. In the late 20th century she became a symbol of feminine
empowerment in some circles.
Kalidasa
islands. A popular and benevolent ruler, he improved harbours to accom-
modate Hawaii’s growing whaling industry and provided free medical care
for Hawaiians. He resolutely opposed the annexation of Hawaii by the U.S.
Kamenev
Kanem-Bornu
the castles of the day. Chinese-style ink painting was blended with poly-
chromatic Yamato-e (“Japanese painting”); some artists used a back-
ground of gold leaf for even more striking effects.
Kanphata Yogi Member of an order of religious ascetics that vener-
ate the Hindu god SHIVA. They are followers of Gorakhnath, a master yogi
of the 12th century or earlier. Their ideology incorporates elements of
magic, mysticism, and alchemy absorbed from both Hindu and Buddhist
esoteric systems. Members focus on acquiring supernatural powers rather
than following the more orthodox practices of meditation and devotion.
They are distinguished by large earrings worn in the hollow of the ear.
Kanpur
kaolinite
ing with the Vienna Philharmonic, the start of a legacy of some 800
recordings. His U.S. debut in 1955 was attended by controversy over his
Nazi-era activities. That same year he became WILHELM FURTWÄNGLER’s suc-
cessor at the Berlin Philharmonic, and he headed the Salzburg Festival
from 1964 until his death.
Karak See KAYA
Karakoram Range Mountain system, south-central Asia. Extending
300 mi (480 km) from eastern Afghanistan to the KASHMIR region, it is one
of the highest mountain systems in the world; its loftiest peak is K2, at
28,251 ft (8,611 m), the world’s second highest peak. Surrounded by other
steep mountain ranges,
the Karakorams are virtually inaccessible,
although the completion of the Karakoram Highway in 1978 improved
transportation in the region. Because of the harsh environment, the area
is thinly populated.
Karakorum
Karlovy Vary
K)r)n
of the earliest HAUSA states, and an ancient centre of learning. The city’s
Fulani emirs retain traditional and advisory roles. It is a market for local
agricultural products as well as a centre for traditional crafts and indus-
Katsura
Kawasaki
minister. The area came under Mongol rule in the 13th century. The Ka-
zakhs consolidated a nomadic empire in the 15th–16th century. Under
Russian rule by the mid-19th century, it became part of the Kirgiz Autono-
mous Republic formed by the Soviets in 1920, and in 1925 its name was
changed to the Kazakh Autonomous S.S.R. Kazakhstan obtained its inde-
pendence from the Soviet Union in 1991. After several years of economic
troubles, it began a period of sustained growth.
Kazan
Kediri
Kellogg-Briand Pact
play, touched on many subjects, especially current affairs. Excepting two
periods when he left the Post, he continued there until 1981; thereafter
he wrote for Newsday, winning a Pulitzer Prize in 1985. His books include
Part of Our Time (1955), on 1930s radical movements in the U.S.; and
The Briar Patch (1973, National Book Award), on New York’s prosecu-
tion of the Black Panthers.
Kenai
1026 I Kennedy (cid:2) Kenya
Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts Huge cultural com-
Kent, Earl of See ODO OF BAYEUX
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
JOMO KENYATTA was
Kenyatta
his government. He went into hiding, then emigrated to western Europe
in 1918. In 1940 he moved to the U.S., where he lectured at universities
and wrote books on the revolution.
Kerguelen
chief of the German air staff in 1936 and commanded early air attacks on
Poland, France, Britain, and the Soviet Union. In 1941 he was appointed
commander in chief, south, to bolster Italy’s efforts in North Africa and
against Malta. He codirected the Axis campaign in North Africa with
ERWIN ROMMEL. After the Allied invasions of Sicily and Italy in 1943, he
fought an effective defensive action that prevented an Allied victory in
that theatre until 1944. Appointed commander in chief, west, in 1945, he
was unable to stop the Allies’ drive into Germany and surrendered the
southern half of the German forces in May 1945. He was imprisoned for
war crimes (1947–52).
kestrel
KGB Russian Komitet Gosudarstvennoy Bezopasnosti
Kh)b)r
headed the Islamic Centre Hamburg in Germany during the Iranian Revo-
lution (1979) and returned home to seek election to the Majles (parlia-
ment) in 1980. He served in government posts during the IRAN-IRAQ WAR
(1980–90), as cultural adviser to Pres. Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, and
as head of the National Library (1992–97) before winning the presidency
on a platform of social and economic reform. He was reelected by an
overwhelming margin in 2001.
Khayr al-Dln See BARBAROSSA
Khayyam, Omar See OMAR KHAYYAM
Khazar
Khorram-dln)n
kibbutz
slav’s death in 1054, his sons divided the empire into warring factions.
The 13th-century MONGOL conquest decisively ended its power.
Kigali
guese in the 16th century, it declined in importance and was abandoned.
Extensive ruins remain, including those of mosques, a Portuguese fort,
and a 13th–14th-century palace. The town of Kilwa on the Tanzanian
coast was the site of a major centre for the export of slaves in the 19th
century.
Kim Dae Jung
Since the 17th century the power held by monarchs, particularly those in
western Europe, has been widely regarded as deriving from the people.
See also CONSTITUTIONAL MONARCHY; KHAN; MONARCHY; PHARAOH; TSAR.
COURTESY OF SIDNEY A. SEIDENBERG, INC.
B.B. King, 1972.
King, Billie Jean orig. Billie Jean Moffitt (b. Nov. 22, 1943, Long
Billie Jean King.
COLORSPORT
King, Larry orig. Lawrence Harvey Zeiger (b. Nov. 19, 1933,
Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.) U.S. talk-show host. He worked in Miami, Fla., as
a radio disc jockey, talk-show host, and freelance broadcaster and writer
(1957–78). He hosted the popular national radio talk show The Larry King
Show (1978–94) and, since 1985, the television talk show Larry King Live
on CNN. Known for his easygoing interviewing style with celebrities,
news makers, and world leaders, he conducted more than 30,000 inter-
views on his two shows.
King, Martin Luther, Jr. (b. Jan. 15, 1929, Atlanta, Ga., U.S.—d.
April 4, 1968, Memphis, Tenn.) U.S.
civil-rights
leader. The son and
grandson of Baptist preachers, King
became an adherent of nonviolence
while in college. Ordained a Baptist
minister himself in 1954, he became
pastor of a church in Montgomery,
Ala.; the following year he received
a doctorate from Boston University.
He was selected to head the Mont-
gomery Improvement Association,
whose boycott efforts eventually
ended the city’s policies of RACIAL SEG-
REGATION on public transportation. In
1957 he formed the SOUTHERN CHRIS-
Martin Luther King, Jr.
JULIAN WASSER
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
King (cid:2) king crab
King, W(illiam) L(yon) Mackenzie (b. Dec. 17, 1874, Berlin, Ont.,
king crab or Alaskan king crab or Japanese crab Marine
DECAPOD (Paralithodes camtschatica), an edible CRAB. It is found in the
shallow waters off Japan and along the Alaska coast; it also inhabits the
1038 I King George Sound (cid:2) Kingston upon Hull
AND INDIAN WAR.
Common king snake (Lampropeltis get-
ula).
JACK DERMID
kingdom of God or kingdom of heaven In CHRISTIANITY, the spiri-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Kingston, Maxine Hong orig. Maxine Hong (b. Oct. 27, 1940,
Kingstown Capital (pop., 1999 est.: 16,175), chief port of SAINT VIN-
CENT AND THE GRENADINES, West Indies. Located on the southwestern end of
Saint Vincent island, it overlooks Kingstown Harbour. Its sites of interest
include the Botanic Gardens (founded 1763), the oldest of its kind in the
Western Hemisphere; Capt. WILLIAM BLIGH made his 1787 voyage on the
Bounty to obtain breadfruit trees from TAHITI for this garden.
Kinnock, Neil (Gordon) (b. March 28, 1942, Tredegar, Monmouth-
shire, Wales) British politician. Elected to Parliament in 1970, he rose in
the LABOUR PARTY ranks and was named to its national executive commit-
tee in 1978. After the party suffered its heaviest defeat in 48 years in 1983,
he was elected party leader, the youngest in its history. By 1989 he had
persuaded the party to abandon its radical policies on disarmament and
large-scale nationalization. Although the party increased its numbers in
Parliament, it lost the 1992 general election to the Conservatives, and
Kinnock resigned as party leader. He became a vice president of the
European Commission of the European Union in 1999.
Kinsey
Kiriwina Islands See TROBRIAND ISLANDS
Kirov
Kitaky)sh)
doubled as community centres for religious activities. The Klamath’s
closely related neighbours were the MODOC. Together with the Modoc and
the Yahooskin band of Snake Indians, they form an entity known as the
Klamath Tribes. Some 2,700 people claimed sole Klamath descent in the
2000 U.S. census.
Klamath
ANDROGENs.
GIORGIO DE CHIRICO.
Kluane
theory Mathematical
theory of closed curves
in three-
dimensional space. The number of times and the manner in which a curve
crosses itself distinguish different KNOTs. The fewest possible crossings is
three, for the overhand (trefoil) knot, which occurs in two mirror versions
according to the directions in which the curve crosses itself. Knot theory
has been used to understand both atomic and molecular structures (pro-
tein folding).
Know-Nothing Party or American Party U.S. political party of
Knowles
and honours, including the Kyoto Prize (1996), the Turing Award (1974),
and the National Medal of Science (1979).
Ko Hung See GE HONG
communism in the essay collection The God That Failed (1949). His later
works, mostly concerning science and philosophy, include The Act of
Creation (1964) and The Ghost in the Machine (1967). Suffering from
leukemia and Parkinson’s disease and believing in voluntary euthanasia,
he died with his wife in a suicide pact.
Kogury£
Kolbe
dig a burrow as deep as 30 ft (9 m). Carrion is their main diet, but adults
may eat smaller Komodos. They can run swiftly and occasionally attack
and kill humans.
Komsomol
Koran See QUR#0N
Korda, Sir Alexander orig. Sándor Laszlo Kellner (b. Sept. 16,
Kordofan
Kornilov
Korsakov, Nicolay Rimsky- See Nicolay RIMSKY-KORSAKOV
Kory£
Kotzebue
important in the economy of the process. In modern kraft mills, opera-
tions are completely contained; waste streams are recycled and reused,
eliminating water pollution.
Krakatoa
Krishnamurti
Kruger, Paul orig. Stephanus Johannes Paulus Kruger (b.
Krupp
Kuan Han-ch’ing See GUAN HANQING
Kuan-yin See AVALOKITESVARA
Kuan Yü See GUAN YU
Kuang-chou See GUANGZHOU
Kuang-wu ti See GUANGWUDI
Kuban River
Kulturkampf
Kuo Hsiang See GUO XIANG
Kuo Mo-jo See GUO MORUO
Kuomintang See NATIONALIST PARTY
Kuusinen
Kwangju
region in ancient times. They were conquered by GENGHIS KHAN’s son Jöchi
in 1207. The area became part of the Qing dynasty of China in the mid-
18th century. It came under Russian control in the 19th century, and its
long rebellion against Russia (and later the Soviet Union) that began in
1916 resulted in a long period of brutal repression. Kirgiziya became an
autonomous province of the Soviet Union in 1924 and was made the Kir-
giz S.S.R. in 1936. Kyrgyzstan gained independence in 1991. It subse-
quently struggled with creating a democratic process and with establishing
a stable economy.
Kyushu Island (pop., 2001 est.: 13,454,000), southernmost of Japan’s
four main islands. Located off the eastern coast of Asia, it is separated
from HONSHU to the north by the Shimonoseki Strait and from SHIKOKU to
Kyzylkum
La Brea
La Rioja
Labov
ber of instruments and procedures to study, systematize, or quantify the
objects of their attention. Procedures often include sampling, pretreatment
and treatment, measurement, calculation, and presentation of results; each
may be carried out by techniques ranging from having an unaided person
use crude tools to running an automated analysis system with computer
controls, data storage, and elaborate readouts.
labour In economics, the general body of wage earners. In CLASSICAL ECO-
NOMICS, labour is one of the three factors of production, along with CAPITAL
and LAND. Labour can also be used to describe work performed, including
any valuable service rendered by a human agent in the production of
wealth, other than accumulating and providing capital. Labour is per-
formed for the sake of its product or, in modern economic life, for the
sake of a share of the aggregate product of the community’s industry. The
price per unit of time, or wage rate, commanded by a particular kind of
labour in the MARKET depends on a number of variables, such as the tech-
nical efficiency of the worker, the demand for that person’s particular
skills, and the supply of similarly skilled workers. Other variables include
training, experience, intelligence, social status, prospects for advance-
ment, and relative difficulty of the work. All these factors make it impos-
sible for economists to assign a standard value to labour. Instead,
economists often quantify labour hours according to the quantity and
value of the goods or services produced.
labour See PARTURITION
See also ARBITRATION; MEDIATION.
sance on, labyrinths or mazes consisting of intricate paths separated by
high hedges were a feature of formal gardens.
Lacan
lactobacillus
within Russia. During the Siege of LENINGRAD (1941–44) in World War II,
the lake was the lifeline that connected the city with the rest of the Soviet
Union.
Ladrone Islands See MARIANA ISLANDS
Laemmle
now in southeastern Iraq. Excava-
tions have uncovered palace and
temple ruins as well as CUNEIFORM
texts that provide information about
Sumer in the 3rd millennium BC.
Founded in the Ubaid period (c.
5200–c. 3500 BC), it came under the
control of SARGON of Akkad. It later
prospered under Gudea, a governor
nominally subject to the Guti. It was
occupied as late as the Parthian era
(247 BC–AD 224).
Lågen River
ton’s Furnace, Bergen Iron Works, and Bricksburg. It is now a popular
resort and recreation area, and its population has tripled since the 1960s.
Lakshadweep
Lake Clark National Park and Preserve National park, south-
lake trout or Mackinaw trout or Great Lakes trout or
Lamarck
present-day Thailand; its capital was the city of Chiang Mai. Lan Na was
a powerful state and a centre for the spread of THERAVADA Buddhism. Under
Tilokaracha (r. 1441–87) it was famous for its Buddhist scholarship and
literature. It remained independent until it was conquered by Myanmar
(Burma) in the 16th century. The Siamese did not reassert control over
the area until the 19th century.
Lan Sang
ants. Other goals include improving the social status of peasants and
coordinating agricultural production with industrialization programs. The
earliest record of land reform is from 6th-century-BC Athens, where SOLON
abolished the debt system that forced peasants to mortgage their land and
labour. The concentration of land in the hands of large landowners became
the rule in the ancient world, however, and remained so through the
Middle Ages and the Renaissance. The FRENCH REVOLUTION brought land
reform to France and established the small family farm as the cornerstone
of French democracy. SERFDOM was abolished throughout most of Europe
in the 19th century. The Russian serfs were emancipated in 1861, and the
RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1917 introduced collectivization of agriculture,
attended by loss of capital and devastating famines. Land reform was
instituted in a number of other countries where communists came to
power, notably China. It remains a potent political issue in many parts of
the world. See also ABSENTEE OWNERSHIP.
land tenure, feudal See FEUDAL LAND TENURE
Landau
Lanfranc
Languedoc
Langtry, Lillie orig. Emilie Charlotte Le Breton (b. Oct. 13, 1853,
SIAN, DRAVIDIAN, ALTAIC, and AUSTROASIATIC; in Africa, NIGER-CONGO, AFRO-
lanthanide
Lapita culture
(1931–33). After the POPULAR FRONT’s election victory in 1936, he became
prime minister and tried to unify the leftist parties; however, an extreme-
left uprising in Barcelona in 1937 during the SPANISH CIVIL WAR caused a
cabinet crisis and he was forced to resign. He went into exile in France
and was interned by the Germans in World War II (1942–45).
Laristan
See also BLACK LEGEND.
Las Navas de Tolosa
Lassus
nence. See also individual artists by name, such as FRIDA KAHLO; OSCAR
NIEMEYER; and DIEGO RIVERA; and authors by name, such as JORGE LUIS BORGES;
Gabriel GARCÍA MÁRQUEZ; and PABLO NERUDA.
Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) formerly (until
1980) Latin American Free Trade Association (LAFTA) Inter-
latite
styles—including ROMANTICISM, NEOCLASSICISM, MODERNISM, and POSTMOD-
was active as an engineer, especially in the design of waterworks. He is
widely regarded as having established architecture as a profession in the
Latter-day Saints, Church of Jesus Christ of See MORMON
lattice, crystal See CR YSTAL LATTICE
Lattre de Tassigny
lauma
cated unity between English and French Canadians, development of the
western territories, protection of Canadian industry, and expansion of the
transportation system. His insistence on protecting Canadian autonomy in
its relations with Britain helped shape the modern concept of a British
Commonwealth of independent states. His support for a treaty of reciproc-
ity with the U.S. contributed to his government’s defeat in 1911. Laurier
is remembered as one of Canada’s most outstanding statesmen.
Lausanne
1084 I
Law (cid:2) Lawrence
law, philosophy of See JURISPRUDENCE
LAW; GERMAN CIVIL CODE.
sin A
sin B
sin C
lawn bowls See BOWLS
Lawrence, D(avid) H(erbert) (b. Sept. 11, 1885, Eastwood, Not-
tinghamshire, Eng.—d. March 2, 1930, Vence, France) English novelist,
short-story writer, poet, and essayist. The son of a Midlands coal miner
and an educated mother, he began to write in 1905 and earned a teaching
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Lawrence, Gertrude orig. Gertrud Alexandra Dagmar
Lawrence Klasen (b. July 4,
1898, London, Eng.—d. Sept. 6,
1952, New York, N.Y., U.S.) British
actress. She began appearing on
stage as a child, and she starred in
musical revues such as NOËL COW-
ARD’s London Calling (1923) and
GEORGE GERSHWIN’s Oh, Kay! (1926).
A longtime friend of Coward’s, she
performed in many of his comedies,
notably Private Lives (1930); both
the play and the stars set the tone that
would characterize
comedies of
manners for a decade or more:
sophistication, brittle wit, and chic.
She was also acclaimed for her roles
in the musicals Lady in the Dark
(1941) and The King and I (1951).
Lawrence, Jacob (b. Sept. 7,
CECIL BEATON
Gertrude Lawrence
Lawrence, John (Laird Mair) later Baron Lawrence (of the
Punjab and of Grately) (b. March 4, 1811, Richmond, Yorkshire,
Eng.—d. June 27, 1879, London) British viceroy and governor-general of
India (1864–69). He worked in Delhi as an assistant judge, magistrate,
and tax collector. After the First SIKH WAR (1845–46) he was made com-
missioner of the newly annexed district of Jullundur, where he subdued
the hill chiefs, established courts and police posts, and curbed female
infanticide and suttee. On the Punjab board of administration he abolished
internal duties, introduced a uniform currency, and encouraged road and
canal construction. As viceroy and governor-general from 1864, he pro-
moted increased educational opportunities for Indians but resisted their
appointment to high civil-service posts. He avoided entanglements in the
affairs of Arabia, the Persian Gulf, and Afghanistan.
Lawrence, Saint or Saint Laurence (d. 258, Rome; feast day
August 10) Roman martyr. He was one of seven deacons in Rome dur-
ing the papacy of Sixtus II. When the pope was executed during the per-
secution of Christians under Valerian, the authorities asked Lawrence to
surrender the churches’ treasures to the state, and he responded by dis-
tributing the money to the poor, for which he was condemned to death.
His fearless behavior at his execution was responsible for many conver-
sions; according to one legend, he was roasted to death on a gridiron,
remarking to his torturers, “I am cooked on that side; turn me over, and
eat.”
Lawrence, T(homas) E(dward) byname Lawrence of Arabia
Laxness
Le Carré
Leacock (cid:2) leaf insect
Leacock, photograph by Yousuf Karsh
ELEMENT,
© KARSH FROM RAPHO/PHOTO RESEARCHERS—EB INC.
lead glance See GALENA
lead poisoning or plumbism Poisoning by accumulation of LEAD in
the body. Large doses cause gastroenteritis in adults and brain disorders
in children. Anemia, constipation and abdominal spasm, confusion, a pro-
gressive paralysis, and sometimes brain cancer result from chronic expo-
sure. Children are particularly susceptible to nerve and brain damage;
sensitive tests show that even low levels of lead can harm children and
are linked to behavioral problems. Sources in the home include lead-based
paint, lead drinking-water pipes, and lead-glazed tableware. Babies, who
put things in their mouths, are at highest risk. Working where lead is used
and exposure to some insecticides are other risk factors. The U.S. phase-
out of lead in gasoline was completed in 1996; similar bans are being
implemented worldwide. Treatment involves giving ANTIDOTES that bind
(see CHELATE) the lead in the tissues.
Leadbelly orig. Huddie William Ledbetter (b. c. Jan. 21, 1885?,
Mooringsport, La., U.S.—d. Dec. 6, 1949, New York, N.Y.) U.S. folk
blues singer and songwriter. As a child he learned to play many instru-
ments; he later worked as an itinerant musician with Blind Lemon Jef-
ferson. In 1918 he was imprisoned for murder; he was pardoned in 1925
by the governor of Texas, who had visited the prison and heard him sing.
Resuming a life of drifting, he was imprisoned for attempted murder in
Structures of a leaf. The epidermis is often covered with a waxy protective cuticle
that helps prevent water loss from inside the leaf. Oxygen, carbon dioxide, and
water enter and exit the leaf through pores (stomata) scattered mostly along the
lower epidermis. The stomata are opened and closed by the contraction and
expansion of surrounding guard cells. The vascular, or conducting, tissues are
known as xylem and phloem; water and minerals travel up to the leaves from the
roots through the xylem, and sugars made by photosynthesis are transported to
other parts of the plant through the phloem. Photosynthesis occurs within the
chloroplast-containing mesophyll layer.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
leaf-footed bug See SQUASH BUG
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
leaf miner Any of various insect larvae that live and feed within a leaf,
including CATERPILLARS, SAWFLY larvae, BEETLE and WEEVIL grubs, and DIPTERAN
maggots. Most leaf-miner burrows or tunnels are either thin, winding,
whitish trails or broad, whitish or brownish blotches. Though leaf miners
do not usually cause injury, they mar the appearance of ornamental trees
and shrubs. One method of control is to remove and burn infested leaves;
spraying with nicotine solutions or dusting with insecticides is effective
only when the adults are emerging.
leafhopper Any of the small, slender, often beautifully coloured and
marked sap-sucking insects of the
large family Cicadellidae. There is a
leafhopper species for almost every
type of plant. Most are less than 0.5
in. (12 mm) long. Leafhoppers can
be serious economic pests. Their
feeding may remove sap, destroy
chlorophyll, transmit disease, or curl
leaves; they also puncture the host
plant while laying eggs. Hopperburn
is a diseased condition caused by
their injection of a toxin into the
plant as they feed.
League of Arab States See
ARAB LEAGUE
Leahy
such as EDWARD C. TOLMAN, claimed they were overly reductive and ignored
a subject’s inner activities. GESTALT-PSYCHOLOGY researchers drew attention
to the importance of pattern and form in perception and learning, while
structural linguists argued that language learning was grounded in a geneti-
cally inherited “grammar.” Developmental psychologists such as JEAN
PIAGET highlighted stages of growth in learning. More recently, cognitive
scientists have explored learning as a form of INFORMATION PROCESSING, while
some brain researchers, such as GERALD MAURICE EDELMAN, have proposed
that thinking and learning involve an ongoing process of cerebral pathway
building. Related topics of research include ATTENTION, COMPREHENSION, MOTI-
VATION, and transfer of TRAINING. See also BEHAVIOUR GENETICS; BEHAVIOURISM;
EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY; IMPRINTING; INSTINCT; INTELLIGENCE.
Leavis
Lebanon Mountains Arabic Jabal Lubn)n
Lee Teng-hui
Lee, Peggy orig. Norma Deloris Egstrom (b. May 26, 1920,
Lee, Robert E(dward) (b. Jan.
19, 1807, Stratford, Westmoreland
county, Va., U.S.—d. Oct. 12, 1870,
Lexington, Va.) U.S. and Confeder-
ate military leader. He was the son of
HENR Y LEE. After graduating from
West Point, he served in the engi-
neering corps and in the Mexican
War under WINFIELD SCOTT. He trans-
ferred to the cavalry in 1855 and
commanded frontier forces in Texas
(1856–57).
In 1859 he led U.S.
troops against the slave insurrection
attempted by JOHN BROWN at Harpers
Ferry. In 1861 he was offered com-
mand of a new army being formed
Leeuwenhoek
Highest-ranking order and decoration of the French republic. It was cre-
ated by NAPOLEON in 1802 as a general military and civil order of merit.
Membership is open to men and women, French citizens and foreigners,
irrespective of rank, birth, or religion. Admission into the Legion requires
20 years of civil achievement in peacetime or extraordinary military brav-
ery and service in times of war.
Legion of Mary Church See MARIA LEGIO
legislative apportionment or legislative delimitation Pro-
DERING, PROPORTIONAL REPRESENTATION.
THE UNITED STATES; DIET; DUMA; EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT; KNESSET; Canadian PAR-
LIAMENT.
legume
on the River Soar, it was settled by Romans. A considerable community
by Norman times, it was the site of a Norman castle and abbey built in
1143, the ruins of which still stand. King RICHARD III was killed near Leices-
ter in the Battle of BOSWORTH FIELD (1485). It was incorporated in 1589 and
became an industrial centre after the arrival of the railway in 1832. The
University of Leicester (founded 1957) is nearby.
Leicester, Earl of See Simon de MONTFORT
Leicester
Leizhou
1096 I
length, area, and volume (cid:2) Leo I
Lenin, Vladimir (Ilich) orig. Vladimir Ilich Ulyanov (b. April
STALINISM, TOTALITARIANISM.
Lenni Lenape See DELAWARE
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
and the VANDALS not to sack the city (455). Leo was also an exponent of the
precept of papal primacy, and his personal example and letters and sermons
contributed greatly to the growth of papal authority.
Leo III known as Leo the Isaurian
cess, but its libretto attracted the interest of the publisher Giulio Ricordi.
GIACOMO PUCCINI’s rejection of Leoncavallo’s help with Manon Lescaut
and Ricordi’s rejection of his own projects caused him in anger to write
the verismo one-act opera Pagliacci (1892) for Ricordi’s rival. Though
he wrote several other operas and operettas, Pagliacci was his only endur-
ing success.
Leone
termed enlightened despotism, he built an efficient state government and
encouraged representative institutions. In 1790 he succeeded his brother
JOSEPH II as emperor and retained many of Joseph’s reforms. In 1792 he
allied with Prussia against revolutionary France, precipitating the FRENCH
REVOLUTIONAR Y WARS.
Leopold III orig. Léopold-Philippe-Charles-Albert-Meinrad-
Hubertus-Marie-Miguel (b. Nov. 3, 1901, Brussels, Belg.—d. Sept.
25, 1983, Brussels) King of the Belgians (1934–51). He succeeded his
father, ALBERT I, and favoured an independent foreign policy but not strict
neutrality. In World War II he assumed command of the Belgian army, but
he surrendered his encircled forces 18 days after the German invasion in
May 1940. The Belgian government repudiated his decision to surrender
and remain with his forces rather than join the government-in-exile in
London. Under house arrest through the war, he later went to Switzerland
(1945–50) to await resolution of the controversy. Though 58% of voters
voted for his return to the throne, he abdicated in 1951 in favour of his
son BAUDOUIN.
Leopold of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen
Lesage
mohair). Industries focus mainly on light manufacturing (textiles and
apparel, furniture, jewelry). Lesotho is a constitutional monarchy with two
legislative houses; its chief of state is the king, and the head of govern-
ment is the prime minister. Bantu-speaking farmers began to settle the
area in the 16th century, and a number of chiefdoms arose. The most
powerful of them organized the Basotho in 1824 and obtained British
protection in 1843 as tension between the Basotho and the South African
Boers increased. It became a British territory in 1868 and was annexed
to the Cape Colony in 1871. The colony’s effort to disarm the Basotho
resulted in revolt in 1880, and four years later it separated from the colony
and became a British High Commission Territory. It became independent
in 1966. A new constitution, effective in 1993, ended seven years of mili-
tary rule. At the beginning of the 21st century, Lesotho suffered from
internal political problems and a deteriorating economy.
Lesse River
Leucothea
Levine
1104 I
Lewis, C. (cid:2) Lewis, S.
is also a possibility of error. His position in epistemology represents a
synthesis of EMPIRICISM and PRAGMATISM.
of the IDENTITY THEOR Y in the PHILOSOPHY OF MIND (see also MIND-BODY PROBLEM);
ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Lewis, John L(lewellyn) (b. Feb. 12, 1880, near Lucas, Iowa,
U.S.—d. June 11, 1969, Washington,
D.C.) U.S. labour leader. The son of
Welsh immigrants, he became a coal
miner at age 15. He rose through the
ranks of the UNITED MINE WORKERS OF
AMERICA (UMWA) and from 1911
was also an organizer of the Ameri-
can Federation of Labor (AFL), with
which the miners’ union was affili-
ated. As president of the UMWA
(1920–60), Lewis
joined several
other AFL union leaders in forming
the Committee for Industrial Organi-
zation (1935) to organize workers in
mass-production
industries. On
breaking with the AFL (see AFL-
CIO), Lewis and other dissident
union heads founded the Congress of
Industrial Organizations. As
president (1936–40), Lewis presided
over the often-violent struggle to
introduce unionism into previously unorganized industries such as steel
John L. Lewis, 1963
AP/WIDE WORLD PHOTOS
and automobiles. See also WILLIAM GREEN; LABOUR UNION; PHILIP MURRAY.
Lewis, Lennox in full Lennox Claudius Lewis (b. Sept. 2, 1965,
Lewis, (Harry) Sinclair (b. Feb.
1885, Sauk Center, Minn.,
U.S.—d. Jan. 10, 1951, near Rome,
Italy) U.S. novelist and social critic.
He worked as a reporter and maga-
zine writer before making his literary
reputation with Main Street (1920),
Sinclair Lewis.
THE GRANGER COLLECTION, NEW YORK
Lexington and Concord, Battles of (April 19, 1775) Initial skir-
Leyden, Lucas van See LUCAS VAN LEYDEN
Leyster
Li Zicheng
1108 I
Liberal Party of Canada (cid:2) libertarianism
SAINT LAURENT, LESTER PEARSON, PIERRE TRUDEAU, and JEAN CHRÉTIEN. Like the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam or Tamil Tigers Guerrilla
organization seeking to establish an independent Tamil state in northern
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
HENR Y DAVID THOREAU and AYN RAND.
(see HUNKERS AND BARNBURNERS) to form the FREE SOIL PARTY.
libido
Licchavi
labourers of Germany and The Netherlands. As a supporter of such aca-
demically unpopular styles as Impressionism and ART NOUVEAU, he
founded the Berlin SEZESSION (1899) but later became president of the
conservative Berlin Academy.
Liebig
Liezi or Lieh-tzu
lightning bug See FIREFLY
lignin
optic communications systems. LEDs are formed by the so-called III-V
compound semiconductors related to gallium arsenide. They consume
little power and are long-lasting and inexpensive.
light fixture See LUMINAIRE
light quantum See PHOTON
light-year Distance traveled by LIGHT moving in a vacuum in one year,
at its accepted speed of 186,282 mi/second (299,792 km/second). It equals
about 5.9 trillion mi (9.5 trillion km), 63,240 ASTRONOMICAL UNITs, or 0.307
PARSEC.
Lightfoot, Gordon (b. Nov. 17, 1938, Orillia, Ont., Can.) Canadian
singer and songwriter. He began writing folk-oriented pop singles in the
mid-1960s, including “Early Morning Rain” and “Ribbon of Darkness.”
His later hits include “If You Could Read My Mind” and “The Wreck of
the Edmund Fitzgerald.” His songs have been covered by singers rang-
ing from BARBRA STREISAND to JERR Y LEE LEWIS.
mainly either INCANDESCENT LAMPS or FLUORESCENT LAMPS and often depends
Liliuokalani
Limbourg
DORIS HUMPHREY and CHARLES WEIDMAN
limonite
support of POPULAR SOVEREIGNTY and the KANSAS-NEBRASKA ACT, while Dou-
PARTY.
Lincolnshire
BOOTH.
Lincoln, Benjamin (b. Jan. 24, 1733, Hingham, Mass.—d. May 9,
1810, Boston) American Revolutionary officer. After serving in the Mas-
sachusetts militia (1755–76), he was appointed major general in the Con-
tinental Army. As commander of forces in the South in 1780, he was
forced to surrender with 7,000 troops after the British victory at Charles-
ton, S.C. Released in a prisoner exchange, he served in the Yorktown
campaign in 1781. From 1781 to 1783 he served as secretary of war, and
in 1787 he commanded the militia forces that suppressed SHAYS’ REBELLION.
From 1789 to 1809 he was collector for the port of Boston.
Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts Travertine-clad cultural
1118 I
Lindisfarne Gospels (cid:2) linga
KELLS.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
including the FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS and the MEAN-VALUE THEOREM
Lingayat
them, BINOMIAL NOMENCLATURE. Linnae-
Linotype
cholesterol from the liver, where it is made, to the cells, where it is used;
high-density lipoproteins (HDLs) may carry excess cholesterol back to
the liver for breakdown and excretion. LDL-bound cholesterol is prima-
rily responsible for deposits in arteries (see ARTERIOSCLEROSIS) that can lead
to CORONAR Y HEART DISEASE, ANGINA PECTORIS, MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION, or STROKE.
HDL does not form such deposits and may actually retard or reduce their
buildup.
Lippe
liquor See DISTILLED LIQUOR
Liri River
cal factions (see DECONSTRUCTION; POSTSTRUCTURALISM; STRUCTURALISM).
BIPOLAR DISORDER.
litho-offset See OFFSET PRINTING
lithography
litmus
translation of Latin liturgies into the vernaculars of individual countries
and the reform of all sacramental rites. The Lutheran Church revised the
Lutheran Book of Worship in 1978, and the Episcopal Church adopted a
revised Book of COMMON PRAYER in 1979.
Litvinov
above the street in Safety Last (1923) and standing in for a football
tackling-dummy in The Freshman (1925). He was the highest paid star
of the 1920s. He received a special Academy Award in 1952.
Lloyd George of Dwyfor, David Lloyd George, Earl (b. Jan.
17, 1863, Manchester, Eng.—d. March 26, 1945, Ty-newydd, near
Llanystumdwy, Caernarvonshire, Wales) British prime minister (1916–
22). He entered Parliament in 1890 as a Liberal and retained his seat for
55 years. He served as president of the Board of Trade (1905–08), then
as chancellor of the Exchequer (1908–15). Rejection of his controversial
“People’s Budget” (to raise taxes for social programs) in 1909 by the
House of Lords led to a constitutional crisis and passage of the PARLIAMENT
ACT OF 1911. He devised the National Insurance Act of 1911, which laid
the foundation of the British WELFARE STATE. As minister of munitions (1915–
16), he used unorthodox methods to ensure that war supplies were forth-
coming during World War I. He replaced H.H. ASQUITH as prime minister
in 1916, with Conservative support in his coalition government. His small
war cabinet ensured speedy decisions. Distrustful of the competence of
the British high command, he was constantly at odds with Gen. DOUGLAS
HAIG. In the 1918 elections his decision to continue a coalition govern-
ment further split the LIBERAL PARTY. He was one of the three great states-
men responsible for the Treaty of VERSAILLES at the PARIS PEACE CONFERENCE.
He began the negotiations that culminated in the Anglo-Irish treaty of
1921. He resigned in 1922 and headed an ailing Liberal Party (1926–31).
Lloyd Webber, Andrew later Baron Lloyd Webber (b. March
ity was limited. See also INSURANCE, LIABILITY INSURANCE.
Llull
British South Africa Co. under CECIL RHODES undertook a military expedi-
tion that destroyed the Ndebele kingdom in 1893. See also KHAMA III.
lobotomy
British EMPIRICISM.
Locofoco
approval before the U.S. would accept certain League decisions. Pres.
WOODROW WILSON refused to accept the amendments, and the Senate
rejected the treaty.
Lodge, Henry Cabot (b. July 5, 1902, Nahant, Mass., U.S.—d. Feb.
27, 1985, Beverly, Mass.) U.S. politician and diplomat. The grandson of
Sen. HENR Y C. LODGE, he served in the U.S. Senate (1937–44, 1947–52)
and as U.S. representative to the UN (1953–60). In 1960 he was the
Republican vice presidential candidate under RICHARD NIXON. During the
1960s he served as U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam and as ambassa-
dor to West Germany. In 1969 he was the chief U.S. negotiator at the
Paris peace talks with North Vietnam. He later served as special envoy
to the Vatican.
loggia
SUBSTANTIATION, and INDULGENCES.
Lomax
BUCKINGHAM PALACE, the TATE GALLERIES, the National Gallery, the BRITISH
MUSEUM, and the VICTORIA AND ALBERT MUSEUM.
London City (pop., 2001: metro area, 432,451), southeastern Ontario.
It lies on the Thames River, near several of the GREAT LAKES. Its name and
site were chosen in 1792 for the location of a capital of Upper Canada,
but the plans failed to materialize. First settled in 1826, it was incorpo-
rated as a city in 1855. It became an important transportation and indus-
trial centre as a result of its interlake location. It is the seat of the
University of Western Ontario.
London, Great Fire of See GREAT FIRE OF LONDON
London, Great Plague of See GREAT PLAGUE OF LONDON
London, Jack orig. John Griffith Chaney (b. Jan. 12, 1876, San
Jack London writing The Sea Wolf,
1904.
JACK LONDON STATE HISTORIC PARK
Lon Nol (cid:2) Long
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
brother). At their new base the Communists were able to build up their
strength at a safe remove from the Nationalists in preparation for their
eventual victory in 1949.
Long Parliament Session of the English Parliament summoned in
November 1640 by CHARLES I, so named to distinguish it from the Short
Parliament of April–May 1640. Charles called the session to raise the
money needed for his war against the Scots. Resistant to Charles’s
demands, the Parliament caused the king’s advisers to resign and passed
an act forbidding its own dissolution without its members’ consent. Ten-
sion between the king and Parliament increased until the ENGLISH CIVIL WAR
broke out in 1642. After the king’s defeat (1646), the army, led by THO-
MAS PRIDE, exercised political power and in 1648 expelled all but 60 mem-
bers of the Long Parliament. The remaining group, called the Rump,
brought Charles to trial and execution (1649); it was forcibly ejected in
1653. In 1659, after the end of OLIVER CROMWELL’s protectorate, the Parlia-
ment was reestablished; those who were excluded in 1648 were restored
to membership. The Parliament dissolved itself in 1660.
longbow Leading missile weapon of the English from the 14th century
into the 16th century. Probably of Welsh origin, it was usually 6 ft (2 m)
tall and shot arrows more than a yard long. The best were made of YEW,
might require a force of 100 lbs (45 kg) to draw, and had an effective
range of 200 yards (180 m). English archers used longbows in the HUN-
DRED YEARS’ WAR, and the weapon played an important role in the battles
of CRÉCY, Poitiers, and AGINCOURT. See also BOW AND ARROW, CROSSBOW.
Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth (b. Feb. 27, 1807, Portland,
Longhi
AMERICAN REVOLUTION.
longitude See LATITUDE AND LONGITUDE
Longmen caves or Lung-men caves Series of Chinese cave
temples carved into the rock of a high riverbank south of Luoyang, in
HENAN province. Construction began late in the NORTHERN WEI DYNASTY (AD
386–535) and continued sporadically through the 6th century and the TANG
DYNASTY. Delicately crafted to create ethereal effects in stone, the temples
contain images of the BUDDHA clothed as a Chinese scholar. Work at Long-
men culminated in 672–675 with the construction of a monumental shrine
known as Fengxian Si, which includes a seated Buddha more than 35 ft
(10.7 m) high.
Longshan culture or Lung-shan culture (2500–1900 BC)
Lönnrot
López Portillo
(1961, Academy Award), Boccaccio
’70 (1962), Yesterday, Today, and
Tomorrow (1964), Marriage Italian
Style (1964), and A Special Day
(1977).
Lorentz
BUNE.)
Los Glaciares
Lou Gehrig disease See AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS
loudspeaker or speaker In SOUND reproduction, device for convert-
ing electrical energy into acoustical (sound) signal energy that is radiated
into a room or open air (see ACOUSTICS). The part of the speaker that con-
verts electrical into mechanical energy is frequently called the motor, or
voice coil. The motor vibrates a diaphragm that vibrates the air in imme-
diate contact with it, producing a sound wave corresponding to the pat-
tern of the original speech, music, or other acoustic signal. See illustration
opposite.
Louganis
1140 I
Louis VII (cid:2) Louis XV style
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
six previous or subsequent heavyweight champions: Primo Carnera, Max
Baer, Jack Sharkey, James J. Braddock, Max Schmeling, and Jersey Joe
Walcott. Nicknamed “the Brown Bomber,” Louis gained the world heavy-
weight championship by defeating Braddock in 1937 and held the title
until 1949. Two of Louis’s most famous bouts, those with the German
boxer Max Schmeling, were invested with nationalist and racial implica-
tions, as Schmeling was seen, unfairly, as the embodiment of Aryanism
and the Nazi party. Louis lost to Schmeling in 1936 but defeated him in
one round in 1938, causing much jubilation among Americans, and espe-
cially African Americans. He successfully defended his title 25 times (21
by knockout) before retiring in 1949. His service in the U.S. Army dur-
ing World War II no doubt prevented him from defending his title many
more times. He made unsuccessful comeback attempts against Ezzard
Charles in 1950 and Rocky Marciano in 1951.
Louis, Morris orig. Morris Louis Bernstein (b. Nov. 24, 1912,
Louis, St. See LOUIS IX
Louis-Napoléon See NAPOLEON III
Louis-Philippe known as the Citizen King (b. Oct. 6, 1773, Paris,
France—d. Aug. 26, 1850, Claremont, Surrey, Eng.) King of the French
(1830–48). Eldest son of the duke d’ORLÉANS, he supported the new gov-
ernment at the outbreak of the French Revolution and joined the Revo-
lutionary army in 1792 but deserted during the war with Austria (1793)
and lived in exile in Switzerland, the U.S., and England. He returned to
France on the restoration of LOUIS XVIII and joined the liberal opposition.
Following the JULY REVOLUTION (1830) and CHARLES X’s abdication, he was
proclaimed the “Citizen King” by ADOLPHE THIERS and elected by the leg-
islature. During the subsequent July Monarchy, he consolidated his power
by steering a middle course between the right-wing monarchists and the
socialists and other republicans but resorted to repressive measures
because of numerous rebellions and attempts on his life. He strengthened
France’s position in Europe and cooperated with the British in forcing the
Dutch to recognize Belgian independence. Mounting middle-class oppo-
sition to his arbritrary rule and his inability to win allegiance from the
new industrial classes caused his abdication during the FEBRUAR Y REVOLU-
TION of 1848.
Louis the Bavarian See LOUIS IV
Louis the Fat See LOUIS VI
Louis the Pious See LOUIS I
Louis the Younger See LOUIS VII
Louisiade
viding decorative motifs. Notable artists and designers include JEAN-
HONORÉ FRAGONARD, FRANÇOIS BOUCHER, and JEAN-BAPTISTE OUDR Y.
including ANNE-ROBERT-JACQUES TURGOT and
CLASSICISM.
Louis XVII orig. Louis-Charles (b. March 27, 1785, Versailles,
France—d. June 8, 1795, Paris) Titular king of France from 1793. The
second son of LOUIS XVI and MARIE-ANTOINETTE, he became heir to the throne
on his brother’s death, shortly after the outbreak of the FRENCH REVOLUTION.
In 1792 he was imprisoned with the rest of the royal family. When his
father was beheaded in 1793, the French ÉMIGRÉ NOBILITY proclaimed Louis-
Charles king. He died in prison at age 10, but the secrecy surrounding his
last months gave rise to rumours that he was not dead, and over the next
few decades more than 30 persons claimed to be Louis XVII. DNA tests
in 2000 established that the child who died in 1795 was in fact the son
of Louis XIV and Marie-Antoinette.
Louis XVIII orig. Louis-Stanislas-Xavier, count de Provence
Louis, Joe in full Joseph Louis Barrow (b. May 13, 1914, Lafay-
ette, Ala., U.S.—d. April 12, 1981, Las Vegas, Nev.) U.S. boxer. Louis
was born into a sharecropper’s family and only began boxing after the
family moved to Detroit. He won the U.S. Amateur Athletic Union title
in 1934 and turned professional that year. During his career he defeated
Louisville
Lovejoy, Elijah P(arish)
1802, Albion, Maine,
U.S.—d. Nov. 7, 1837, Alton, Ill.)
U.S. newspaper editor and abolition-
ist. He moved to St. Louis in 1827. In 1833 he became editor of the St.
Louis Observer, a Presbyterian weekly in which he wrote articles strongly
condemning slavery. Under the threat of mob violence (1836), he moved
his paper from the slave state of Missouri across the river to Alton, in the
free state of Illinois. There mobs repeatedly destroyed his presses, and he
was shot and killed while defending his building against an attack. News
of his death strengthened abolitionist sentiment.
Lovelace, Ada King, countess of orig. Augusta Ada Byron,
Lovell
Lowry
Lubbock
Lucerne
Ludwig I See LOUIS I
Ludwig II See LOUIS II
Ludwig IV See LOUIS IV
Ludwig, Carl F(riedrich) W(ilhelm) (b. Dec. 29, 1816, Witzen-
Lueger
Luhya or Luyia
Lunacharsky, Anatoly (Vasilyevich) (b. Nov. 23, 1875, Poltava,
Ukraine, Russian Empire—d. Dec. 26, 1933, Menton, France) Russian
politician and writer. Deported in 1898 for his revolutionary activities, he
joined the BOLSHEVIKs in 1904 and disseminated propaganda to Russian
students and political refugees in foreign countries. He joined VLADIMIR ILICH
LENIN in Russia in 1917 and was appointed commissar for education, a
role in which he did much to ensure the preservation of works of art dur-
ing the RUSSIAN CIVIL WAR. He encouraged innovation in the theatre and in
education, and he published plays of his own.
Lunceford
Lupino
Luther, Martin (b. Nov. 10, 1483, Eisleben, Saxony—d. Feb. 18, 1546,
Eisleben) German priest who sparked the REFORMATION. The son of a miner,
he studied philosophy and law before entering an Augustinian monastery
in 1505. He was ordained two years later and continued his theological
studies at the University of Wittenberg, where he became a professor of
biblical studies. He was shocked by the corruption of the clergy on a trip
to Rome in 1510 and was later troubled by doubts centring on fear of
divine retributive justice. His spiritual crisis was resolved when he hit on
the idea of JUSTIFICATION by faith, the doctrine that salvation is granted as a
gift through God’s grace. He urged reform of the Roman Catholic church,
protesting the sale of INDULGENCES and other abuses, and in 1517 he dis-
tributed to the archbishop of Mainz and several friends his NINETY-FIVE
THESES (according to legend, Luther nailed the theses to the door of the
castle church in Wittenberg); the theses questioned Roman Catholic teach-
ing and called for reform. In 1521 he was excommunicated by POPE LEO
IX and declared an outlaw at the Diet of Worms (see WORMS, DIET OF).
Under the protection of the elector of Saxony, Luther took refuge in Wart-
burg. There he translated the Bible into German; his superbly vigorous
translation has long been regarded as the greatest landmark in the history
of the GERMAN LANGUAGE. He later returned to Wittenberg, and in 1525 he
married the former nun Katherina von Bora, with whom he raised six
children. Though his preaching was the principal spark that set off the
PEASANTS’ WAR (1524–25), his vehement denunciation of the peasants con-
tributed to their defeat. His break with Rome led to the founding of the
Lutheran Church (see LUTHERANISM); the Lutheran confession of faith or,
AUGSBURG CONFESSION, was produced with Luther’s sanction by PHILIPP
MELANCHTHON in 1530. Luther’s writings included hymns, a liturgy, and
many theological works.
Lutheranism Protestant movement founded on the principles of MAR-
TIN LUTHER. Lutheranism arose at the start of the REFORMATION, after Luther
posted his NINETY-FIVE THESES in Wittenberg. It spread through much of Ger-
many and into Scandinavia, where it was established by law. It was
brought to the New World by the colonists of New Netherland and NEW
SWEDEN and spread through the U.S. Middle Atlantic states in the 18th
century and the Midwest in the 19th century. Its doctrines are contained
in the catechisms of Luther and in the AUGSBURG CONFESSION. Lutheran
doctrine emphasizes SALVATION by faith alone and the primacy of the BIBLE
as the church’s authority. The Lutheran ministry is one of service—not
special status—and is described as the priesthood of all believers. Luth-
erans accept two sacraments (baptism and the Eucharist) and believe in
predestination to salvation. The Lutheran World Federation is based in
Geneva. See also PIETISM.
lutite
Luxemburg
the Ionian Greeks in the 7th–6th centuries BC through such economic
developments as the use of metallic coinage. It was conquered by the Per-
sians under CYRUS II in 546 BC. It later passed to Syria and Pergamum, and
under the Romans it became part of the province of Asia.
lye Alkaline (see ALKALI) liquid extracted by soaking wood ashes in water,
commonly used for washing and in making SOAP. More generally, lye is
any strong alkaline solution or solid, such as sodium hydroxide (CAUSTIC
SODA) or potassium hydroxide (caustic potash).
Lyell
a Roman citizen; all his speeches were delivered by others. He and his
brother were seized by the ruling oligarchy in 404 as disaffected aliens;
his brother was killed but Lysias
escaped. He ranks with ANTIPHON as
a writer of clear, simple prose of
great effectiveness, and his style
became one model for Attic Greek
prose. Many of his writings survive.
lysine
M31 See ANDROMEDA GALAXY
Ma-fa-mu-ts’o See MAPAM YUMCO
maa-alused
MacAlpin, Kenneth See KENNETH I
macaque
Macdonald, Sir John (Alexander) (b. Jan. 11, 1815, Glasgow,
PROGRESSIVE CONSERVATIVE PARTY OF CANADA) in 1854 and became premier of
Macdonough
Macfadden, Bernarr orig. Bernard Adolphus McFadden (b.
LATHES; SHAPERS and PLANERS; power DRILLS or DRILL PRESSES; MILLING machines;
GRINDING MACHINES; power SAWS; and presses (e.g., PUNCH PRESSES).
machismo
Mackinac
while studying at Oxford. In the 1930s he became known as one of a
group of socially committed young poets that included W.H. AUDEN, C.
DAY-LEWIS, and STEPHEN SPENDER. His volumes include Autumn Journal
(1939) and The Burning Perch (1963). He wrote and produced radio verse
plays for the BBC, notably The Dark Tower (1947), with music by BEN-
JAMIN BRITTEN. Among his prose works are Letters from Iceland (1937; with
Auden) and The Poetry of W.B. Yeats (1941).
Macon
Madani
was made into the new state of Chhattisgarh. Though Madhya Pradesh is
rich in mineral resources, its economic mainstay is agriculture.
Madhyamika
Maeander River See MENDERES RIVER
Maecenas
Magdalen
SHAMAN, VODUN, WITCHCRAFT AND SORCER Y.
MARQUEZ, JORGE AMADO, JORGE LUIS BORGES, MIGUEL ANGEL ASTURIAS, JULIO
CORTAZAR, and Isabel Allende (born 1942). The term has been applied to
literature and art outside of Latin America as well.
magic show See CONJURING
Maginot
and many compounds had been tested for MAGNETISM, and all were found to
have some magnetic property. However, only three elements—iron, NICKEL,
and COBALT—exhibit FERROMAGNETISM. See also COMPASS, ELECTROMAGNET.
PARAMAGNETISM)
NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RESONANCE and ELECTRON SPIN RESONANCE. In medicine, MAG-
NETIC RESONANCE IMAGING is used to produce images of human tissue.
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) Computer production of
are DIAMAGNETISM, PARAMAGNETISM, FERROMAGNETISM, and FERRIMAGNETISM. Mag-
ACCELERATORS.
magnetite or lodestone or magnetic iron ore Iron OXIDE MINERAL
magneto
PHOTOMETR Y.
Magnus Pius, Sextus Pompeius See Sextus POMPEIUS MAGNUS PIUS
magpie Any of several genera of long-tailed songbirds of the CROW
family (Corvidae). The black-billed magpie (Pica pica) is 18 in. (45 cm)
long and strikingly pied (black-and-white), with an iridescent blue-green
tail. It is found in North Africa, across Eurasia, and in western North
America. A bird of farmlands and tree-studded open country, it eats
insects, seeds, small vertebrates, the eggs and young of other birds, and
fresh carrion. It makes a large, round nest of twigs cemented with mud,
and is known for hoarding small, bright objects. Other species (in the
genera Cyanopica, Cissa, and Urocissa) include the brilliant blue or green
magpies of Asia.
Magritte
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi orig. Mahad Prasad Varma (b.
1911?, India) Indian religious leader, founder of TRANSCENDENTAL MEDITA-
TION (TM). He took a degree in physics before going to the Himalayas to
study the ADVAITA school of VEDANTA religious thought with the yogi Guru
Dev for 13 years. He arrived in the U.S. in 1959, preaching the virtues
of TM; in the 1960s the BEATLES were perhaps his most celebrated follow-
ers. The Maharishi (the title means “Great Sage”) returned to India in the
late 1970s and moved to The Netherlands in 1990. His organization,
which includes real estate holdings, schools, and clinics, was worth more
than $3 billion in the late 1990s.
Mahasanghika
and the New York Philharmonic in 1909–10. Ill with heart disease and
mourning his daughter’s death, he wrote the masterly orchestral song
cycle Das Lied von der Erde (1908–09) and his ninth symphony. His
orchestral songs Des Knaben Wunderhorn (1892–98) and Kindertoten-
lieder (1904; Songs on the Deaths of Children) are frequently performed.
His emotionally charged and subtly orchestrated music drew together
many different strands of Romanticism. Although his music was largely
ignored for 50 years after his death, he was later regarded as an impor-
tant forerunner of 20th-century techniques of composition.
Maem)d
Maine, Sir Henry (James Sumner) (b. Aug. 15, 1822, Kelso,
cations by CLIENT-SERVER ARCHITECTURE.
Maintenon
himself was perceived as a colourless and indecisive leader. In 1997 the
Conservatives lost by a landslide to the LABOUR PARTY, and Major was suc-
ceeded as prime minister by TONY BLAIR.
Majorca
Malabo
Malawi, Lake or Lake Nyasa
Malcolm X orig. Malcolm Little later El-Hajj Malik
El-Shabazz (b. May 19, 1925,
Omaha, Neb., U.S.—d. Feb. 21,
1965, New York, N.Y.) U.S. black
Muslim leader. He was raised in
Michigan, where the family house
was burned by the Ku Klux Klan; his
father was later murdered and his
mother was
institutionalized. He
moved to Boston, drifted into petty
crime, and was sent to prison for bur-
glary in 1946. He converted to the
Black Muslim faith (NATION OF ISLAM)
the same year. On his release in
1952, he changed his last name to X
to signify his rejection of his “slave
name.” Soon after meeting the
Nation of
Islam’s
leader, ELIJAH
MUHAMMAD, he became the sect’s
most effective speaker and organizer.
He spoke with bitter eloquence
against white exploitation of blacks and derided the civil rights move-
ment and integration, calling instead for black separatism, black pride,
and the use of violence for self-protection. Differences with Elijah
Muhammad prompted Malcolm to leave the Nation of Islam in 1964. A
pilgrimage to Mecca led him to acknowledge the possibility of world
brotherhood and to convert to orthodox Islam. Rival Black Muslims made
threats against his life, and he was shot to death at a rally in a Harlem
ballroom. His celebrated autobiography (1965) was written by ALEX HALEY
on the basis of numerous interviews conducted shortly before Malcolm’s
death.
Maldives
KUALA
LUMPUR/
Maldon
Malinke
Malpighi
front teeth. They inhabit sub-Saharan Africa, where they hunt small ani-
mals. The aggressive black mamba (D. polylepis), up to 14 ft (4.2 m) long,
may be dull gray, greenish brown, or black, depending on age. It dens in
rocky open country. It rears up to strike, biting a person’s head or trunk.
Its bite is nearly always fatal without antivenin treatment. The green
mamba (e.g., D. angusticeps) is smaller (to 9 ft, or 2.7 m), more strongly
arboreal, and less aggressive.
Mamet
GARBO, Becky Sharp (1935), The Gay Desperado (1936), Blood and Sand
(1941), and Silk Stockings (1957). He was noted for the skillful blending
of music and sound effects with an imaginative visual rhythm.
Ma#m)n
the sea, it again became a major inland port and commercial centre, reviv-
ing economically in the mid-20th century. It has botanical gardens and an
opera house, and the National Research Institute of Amazonia (INPA) and
the Federal University of Amazonas are located there.
Manawatu
heavenly spheres to reunion with the supreme deity. Unlike many Gnos-
tic systems, Mandaeanism supports marriage and forbids sexual license.
It is also characterized by elaborate cultic rituals, particularly for baptism.
Mandaeans view JESUS as a false messiah but revere JOHN THE BAPTIST, whose
life is chronicled in their sacred writings. See also DUALISM, GNOSTICISM.
mandala
writing of his travels in the years
1322 to 1356. Because most of the
material was available in contempo-
encyclopaedias
travel
books, it is not clear whether the
author ever traveled at all, but his lit-
erary skill and imagination have kept
the book popular and highly read-
able. The actual author of the tales
remains unknown. It is not certain
the English knight Sir John
Mandeville ever existed.
Mandingo See MALINKE
Mandinka See MALINKE
mandolin
STATE BUILDING, the site of the former WORLD TRADE CENTER, the UNITED NATIONS
headquarters, WALL STREET, the METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART, the MUSEUM OF
MODERN ART, LINCOLN CENTER for the Performing Arts, CARNEGIE HALL, COLUM-
it was ruled as a union territory until it became a state in 1972. Agricul-
ture and forestry are economic mainstays.
Manitoba
IL BRONZINO.
Mannheim
Mantle, Mickey in full Mickey Charles Mantle (b. Oct. 20, 1931,
BUDDHISM.
enced by WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
Manzù
of ornamental, shade, and timber trees. Maples are important ornamen-
tals for lawns, along streets, and in parks. They offer a great variety of
form, size, and foliage; many display striking autumn colour. The red
maple (A. rubrum) is one of the most common trees in its native eastern
North America, where it tolerates compacted wet soils and city pollution.
Box elder (A. negundo) grows quickly to 30–50 ft (9–15 m) and resists
drought, so early prairie settlers planted many for shade and for wood to
make crates, furniture, paper pulp, and charcoal. The watery, sweet sap
of the sugar maple (A. saccharum) is boiled down for syrup and sugar;
the wood of certain sugar maples is used for furniture.
mapmaking See CARTOGRAPHY
Maponos
jungles in unnavigable rapids and falls; emerging from the most spectacu-
lar of these rapids, the Pongo de Manseriche, it is only 575 ft (175 m)
above sea level. For the rest of its 879-mi (1,415-km) course, it meanders
eastward, receiving the HUALLAGA RIVER and then joining the UCAYALI RIVER
to form the Amazon.
Marat
Marcellus
Marcus Aurelius
extended the Habsburg dominion in
the northeastern Netherlands and
negotiated the Treaty of CAMBRAI
(1529), called the “Ladies’ Peace,”
with Louise of Savoy (1494–1547),
regent for FRANCIS I.
Margaret of Parma (b. 1522,
Margaret of Valois
mariachi
imperial theatre in St. Petersburg. The theatre opened in 1860 and was
named for Maria Aleksandrovna, wife of the reigning tsar. Ballet was not
performed there until 1880 and was presented regularly only after 1889,
when the Imperial Russian Ballet became its resident company and
acquired the Mariinsky name. The theatre’s name was changed to the State
Academic Theatre (1917–35) and later to the Kirov (for SERGEY KIROV)
State Academic Theatre for Opera and Ballet (1935–91); it reverted to its
original name in 1991. Its resident ballet company, the celebrated Mari-
insky (or Kirov) Ballet, tours worldwide.
marijuana
a tribe of the Zan)tah group, which was allied to the Umayyads in Cór-
doba. In 1248 a Marlnid leader, AbH Yaey), captured Fès and made it the
Marlnid capital. The capture of Marrakech (1269) made the Marlnids the
masters of Morocco. They waged inconclusive war in Spain and Africa
that gradually depleted their resources, reducing the realm to anarchy in
the 15th century. Sa!dl sharifs captured Fès in 1554.
Marino, Dan(iel Constantine), Jr. (b. Sept. 15, 1961, Pittsburgh,
Mariology
Markham
1714. Considered one of England’s greatest generals, he secured a repu-
tation in Europe that was unrivaled until the rise of Napoleon.
Marlborough, Sarah Jennings, duchess of (b. May 29, 1660,
Marley, Bob orig. Robert Nesta Marley (b. Feb. 6, 1945, Nine
Marmara
Ua Pu, Ua Huka, Eiao, and Hatutu. The Spanish explorer Àlvaro de
Mendaña de Neira named the islands for the marquesa de Mendoza in
1595. Annexed by France in 1842, the Marquesas form an administrative
division of French Polynesia with headquarters at Taiohae on Nuku Hiva.
marquess
Marsalis
and was a key factor in reviving their economies and stabilizing their
political structures. The plan’s concept was extended to less-developed
countries under the POINT FOUR PROGRAM.
Marshfield Bay See COOS BAY
Marsic War See SOCIAL WAR
marsupial
See also FISHER; POLECAT.
Martí
Martínez Montañés, Juan See Juan Martínez MONTAÑÉS
Martinique
Maryinsky Theatre See MARIINSKY THEATRE
Masaccio
DIALECTICAL MATERIALISM; SOCIALISM; STALINISM; TROTSKYISM.
Mary, Queen of Scots orig. Mary Stuart (b. Dec. 8, 1542, Lin-
lithgow Palace, West Lothian, Scot.—d. Feb. 8, 1587, Fotheringhay
Castle, Northamptonshire, Eng.) Queen of Scotland (1542–67). She
became queen when her father, James V (1512–42), died six days after
her birth. She was sent by her mother, Mary of Guise, to be raised at the
court of the French king HENR Y II and was married in 1558 to his son FRAN-
CIS II. After Francis’s brief rule as king (1559–60) ended with his prema-
ture death, Mary returned to Scotland (1561), where she was distrusted
Masada
masochism
cution in England, and they transferred control of the company to the
emigrants in Massachusetts. Led by JOHN WINTHROP, the colonists founded
their colony on the CHARLES RIVER at what would become BOSTON. In 1684
England annulled the company’s charter and in 1691 established royal
government under a new charter, which merged PLYMOUTH colony and
Maine into the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) U.S. private uni-
massage
mass spectrometry or mass spectroscopy Analytic technique
Massif Central
MAMMOTH.
mastoiditis
PSYCHOLOGY. See also IDENTITY THEOR Y; MIND-BODY PROBLEM.
OF MATERIALS, TESTING MACHINE.
Mather
mathematical physics Branch of mathematical ANALYSIS that empha-
sizes tools and techniques of particular use to physicists and engineers. It
focuses on VECTOR SPACES, MATRIX algebra, DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS (especially
for boundary value problems), INTEGRAL EQUATIONS, INTEGRAL TRANSFORMS, INFI-
NITE SERIES, and COMPLEX VARIABLES. Its approach can be tailored to applica-
tions in electromagnetism, classical MECHANICS, and QUANTUM MECHANICS.
mathematical programming Application of mathematical and
computer programming techniques to the construction of deterministic
models, principally for business and economics. For models that only
require linear algebraic equations, the techniques are called LINEAR PRO-
GRAMMING; for models that require more complex equations, it is called
nonlinear programming. In either case, models frequently involve hun-
dreds or thousands of equations. The discipline emerged during World
War II to solve large-scale military LOGISTICS problems. Mathematical pro-
gramming is also used in planning civilian production and transportation
schedules and in calculating economic growth.
mathematics Science of structure, order, and relation that has evolved
from counting, measuring, and describing the shapes of objects. It deals
with logical reasoning and quantitative calculation. Since the 17th cen-
tury it has been an indispensable adjunct to the physical sciences and
technology, to the extent that it is considered the underlying language of
science. Among the principal branches of mathematics are ALGEBRA, ANALY-
SIS, ARITHMETIC, COMBINATORICS, EUCLIDEAN and NON-EUCLIDEAN geometries, GAME
THEOR Y, NUMBER THEOR Y, NUMERICAL ANALYSIS, OPTIMIZATION, PROBABILITY, SET THEOR Y,
STATISTICS, TOPOLOGY, and TRIGONOMETR Y.
Mathias
Matteotti
Maugham
Mauritius
MawÆil, Al- See MOSUL
Maximian
Maxwell, (Ian) Robert orig. Jan Ludvik Hoch (b. June 10, 1923,
CHEEVER, J.D. SALINGER, EUDORA WELTY, and MAVIS GALLANT. He himself was
the NATIONALIST PARTY and gave birth to the CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY. See
also Treaty of VERSAILLES.
Diego, Calif, U.S.) German-born U.S. physicist. She immigrated to the
U.S. in 1930, where she taught at various universities. She worked on the
separation of URANIUM ISOTOPEs for the MANHATTAN PROJECT. Her work in
theoretical physics led to the explanation of properties of atomic nuclei
based on a structure of “shells” occupied by protons and neutrons. For
her work she was awarded a 1963 Nobel Prize, which she shared with
Hans Jensen (1907–73) and EUGENE WIGNER.
July 19, 1865, Rochester—d. May 26, 1939, Chicago, Ill.), a gifted sur-
geon in all areas, originated modern procedures in goitre surgery, neuro-
surgery, and orthopedic surgery. About 1900 the partnership was changed
to a voluntary association of physicians and specialists, later known as
the Mayo Clinic. In 1915 the brothers established the Mayo Foundation
for Medical Education and Research, which offers graduate training in
medicine and related subjects.
Mayerling affair See RUDOLF
Mayon
mayflower See TRAILING ARBUTUS
Maysles
Mboya
McClung, Nellie orig. Nellie Mooney (b. Oct. 20, 1873, Chats-
McCormick, Robert R(uther-
ford) known as Colonel McCor-
McCrea
economics at the University of California, Berkeley (1963–79 and from
1990), Yale University (1977–78), and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (1978–91). In 1974 McFadden developed conditional logit
analysis—a method for determining how people make choices that maxi-
mize the utility of their decisions. His work has helped predict usage rates
for MASS TRANSIT, and his statistical methods have been applied to labour-
force participation, health care, housing, and the environment.
McGill University Privately endowed but state-supported university
in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. It was founded in 1821 through a gift left
by the Scottish-born Canadian merchant James McGill (1744–1813). It is
internationally known for its work in chemistry, medicine, and biology.
In addition, it has faculties of agricultural and environmental sciences,
arts, dentistry, education, engineering, law, management, music, religious
studies, and science. The language of instruction is English, though stu-
dents may write examinations in French.
McGillivray
crat WILLIAM JENNINGS BR YAN. In 1897
he signed the Dingley Tariff,
highest protective tariff in American
history to that time. In 1898 the USS
MAINE exploded and sank in the har-
bour of Havana, Cuba, then a colony
of Spain; believing the Spanish
responsible, McKinley demanded
independence for the island, which
Spain refused. The U.S. easily won
the brief SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR.
McLuhan
mean, median, and mode In mathematics, the three principal ways
of designating the average value of a list of numbers. The arithmetic mean
is found by adding the numbers and dividing the sum by the number of
numbers in the list. This is what is most often meant by an average. The
median is the middle value in a list ordered from smallest to largest. The
mode is the most frequently occurring value on the list. There are other
types of means. A geometric mean is found by multiplying all values in
a list and then taking the root of that product equal to the number of val-
ues (e.g., the square root if there are two numbers). The geometric mean
is typically used in cases of exponential growth or decline (see EXPONEN-
TIAL FUNCTION). In STATISTICS, the mean of a RANDOM VARIABLE is its expected
value—i. e., the theoretical long-run arithmetic mean of the outcomes of
repeated trials, such as a large number of tosses of a die.
mean-value theorems In mathematics, two theorems, one associ-
INTEGRAL. See also ROLLE’S THEOREM.
meander
Mead, George Herbert (b. Feb. 27, 1863, South Hadley, Mass.,
U.S.—d. April 26, 1931, Chicago, Ill.) U.S. philosopher, sociologist, and
social psychologist prominent in the development of PRAGMATISM. He stud-
ied at Oberlin College, graduated from Harvard University (B.A., 1888),
and went on to study philosophy and psychology at the Universities of
Leipzig and Berlin (1888–91). Mead then taught philosophy and psychol-
ogy at the University of Michigan (1891–94) with JOHN DEWEY and CHARLES
HORTON COOLEY. In 1894 he joined Dewey in moving to the University of
Chicago and taught there the rest of his life. Mead’s focus was the rela-
tionship between the self and society, particularly the emergence of the
human self in the process of social interaction. His works include The
Philosophy of the Present (1932) and Mind, Self, and Society (1934). See
also INTERACTIONISM.
measles or rubeola
Med fly See MEDITERRANEAN FRUIT FLY
made by BENVENUTO CELLINI.
Medan
Médicis, Catherine de See CATHERINE DE MÉDICIS
Médicis, Marie de See MARIE DE MÉDICIS
Medill
near Mantua. He was known as Giovanni dalle Bande Nere (“of the Black
Bands”) for the black banners his army (or bands) carried in mourning
for Leo X after 1521.
Medici, Giuliano de’ (b. 1479—d. March 17, 1516, Florence) Ruler
of Florence (1512–13). A member of the elder branch of the MEDICI FAM-
ILY, he was the son of Lorenzo de’ MEDICI. In 1494 his brother, Piero de’
Medici, was ousted as ruler of Florence by the republicans, aided by the
French. In 1512 Pope JULIUS II demanded that Florence enter his Holy
League against France and allow the exiled Medici to return to Florence.
Giuliano returned as ruler (Piero having died in 1503) and used harsh
measures to suppress a conspiracy. In 1513, after another brother became
Pope LEO X, he went to Rome as a cardinal. In 1515 he received the French
title of duke de Nemours.
Medici, Lorenzo de’ known as Lorenzo the Magnificent (b. Jan.
1, 1449, Florence—d. April 9, 1492,
Careggi, near Florence) Florentine
statesman and patron of arts and let-
ters. The
grandson
DE’MEDICI, he was the most brilliant of
of COSIMO
the MEDICI FAMILY. He ruled FLORENCE
with his younger brother, Giuliano,
from 1469. Giuliano was assassi-
nated in 1478 by the Pazzi, a leading
Florentine banking family, which
was in league with Pope SIXTUS IV
(who did not support the assassina-
tion) and the king of Naples. Loren-
zo’s direct appeal to the king allowed
him to regain power in Florence, and
he was sole ruler of the city until his
death. His 13-year-old son Giovanni
was created a cardinal by Pope Inno-
cent VIII and later became pope as
LEO X. Lorenzo used the Medici
riches to patronize many artists,
including SANDRO BOTTICELLI, LEONARDO
DA VINCI, and MICHELANGELO, and he
systems, it includes research, PUBLIC HEALTH, EPIDEMIOLOGY, and PHARMACOLOGY.
Each country sets its own requirements for medical degrees (M.D.’s) and
TAR connects the Mediterranean with the Atlantic Ocean. In the northeast
the Sea of MARMARA, the DARDANELLES, and the BOSPORUS link it with the
BLACK SEA. The SUEZ CANAL connects the Mediterranean with the RED SEA
in the southeast. A submarine ridge between SICILY and Africa divides the
sea into eastern and western parts, which are subdivided into the Adriatic,
Aegean, Tyrrhenian, Ionian, and Ligurian seas. Its largest islands are
MAJORCA, CORSICA, SARDINIA, SICILY, CRETE, CYPRUS, and RHODES. The RHÔNE,
medusa
a system of spiritual beliefs according to which the goal of life was to
realize the oneness of God, from whom the whole universe emanates.
Convinced that his calling was to awaken the world to that realization
through love, he worked zealously with the poor and the physically and
mentally ill. Though he attracted a sizable following in India and abroad,
he did not try to establish a religion. For the last 44 years of his life he
maintained silence, communicating by means of gestures and an alpha-
bet board. His tomb at Meherabad is a place of pilgrimage.
Mehmed
to treat African languages in terms of PHONETICS and MORPHOLOGY. His books
include Outline of the Phonetics of the Bantu Languages (1899) and
Principles of the Comparative Grammar of the Bantu Languages (1906).
Meinong
Melanchthon
Melilla
Memel
Mencius
Menderes
meninges
cessful commission for the Metropolitan Opera. The Medium (1946) had
a Broadway run, and The Consul (1950, Pulitzer Prize) was also success-
ful. The highly popular Amahl and the Night Visitors (1951), for televi-
sion, was followed by The Saint of Bleecker Street (1955, Pulitzer Prize).
In 1958 he founded the Festival of Two Worlds in Spoleto, Italy; it enjoyed
great success, and in 1977 he founded a New World counterpart in
Charleston, S.C.
Menshevik
Mercator
merengue
meristem
Mersey
the AZTEC. See also CHICHÉN ITZÁ; MIXTEC; MONTE ALBÁN; NAHUA; NAHUATL
LANGUAGE; TENOCHTITLÁN; TIKAL.
from the MAYA CODICES. See also MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION.
Mesolithic
Messiaen
century. ALBRECHT DÜRER and LEONARDO
DA VINCI were its greatest exponents.
It went out of fashion in the 17th cen-
tury with the rise of the graphite pen-
cil but was revived in the 18th
century by the miniaturists and in the
20th century by Joseph Stella.
metallography
metastable
and explosive. A clean-burning fuel, it may substitute (at least in part) for
GASOLINE. It is also used for DENATURATION of ETHANOL. A violent poison, it
causes blindness and eventually death when drunk.
methionine
Montejo conquered the remnants of Maya
civilization in 1526, and Mexico became
part of the Viceroyalty of NEW SPAIN. In
1821 rebels negotiated independence from
Spain, and in 1823 a new congress declared Mexico a republic. In 1845
the U.S. voted to annex TEXAS, initiating the MEXICAN WAR. Under the Treaty
of GUADALUPE HIDALGO in 1848, Mexico ceded a vast territory in what is
now the western and southwestern U.S. The Mexican government endured
several rebellions and civil wars in the late 19th and early 20th centuries
(see MEXICAN REVOLUTION). During World War II (1939–45) it declared war
on the AXIS POWERS, and in the postwar era it was a founding member of
the UNITED NATIONS (1945) and the ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (1948).
INSTITUTIONAL REVOLUTIONAR Y PARTY. See table on opposite page.
México
and 1867 the university was controlled by the Roman Catholic church.
After 1867, independent professional schools of law, medicine, engineer-
ing, and architecture were established by the government. The university
was given administrative autonomy in 1929. It offers a broad range of
programs in all major academic and professional subjects.
Mexico City Spanish Ciudad de México
at ensuring tribal welfare. In the 19th century the Miami ceded most of
their lands to the U.S., with one band remaining in Indiana and the rest
removing to a reservation in Oklahoma. In the 2000 U.S. census some
3,800 people claimed sole Miami descent. See also LITTLE TURTLE.
Miami City (pop., 2000: 362,470), southeastern Florida, U.S., situated
on BISCAYNE BAY at the mouth of the Miami River. The southernmost large
city in the continental U.S., it has a beach 7 mi (11 km) long. A Spanish
mission was founded near the site in 1567, but permanent settlement did
not begin until 1835, when U.S. forces built Fort Dallas for the removal
of SEMINOLE Indians to the West. The arrival of the railway in 1896 spurred
development, and Miami was incorporated the same year. The city has
been damaged by occasional hurricanes, notably in 1926 and 1935. Nearly
300,000 Cuban refugees have arrived since 1959 (see CUBA), establishing
“Little Havana” within the city. It is a major resort and retirement centre,
and its port handles the world’s largest number of cruise-ship passengers.
It is also a banking centre. Educational institutions include the University
of Miami and Florida International University.
Miami Beach City (pop., 2000: 87,933), southeastern Florida, U.S. It
is situated on an island across BISCAYNE BAY from MIAMI. Until 1912 the site
was a mangrove swamp. John S. Collins and Carl F. Fisher pioneered real
estate development and built a bridge across the bay; the area was dredged
to form an island measuring 7.4 sq mi (19 sq km), with an 8-mi (13-km)
beach. The city, incorporated in 1915, is now a luxury resort and con-
vention centre. It is connected with Miami by several causeways and is
noted for its ART DECO architecture.
Miao See HMONG
Miao-Yao languages See HMONG-MIEN LANGUAGES
include the vivid and impassioned Histoire de la révolution française, 7
vol. (1847–53). In his later years he wrote a series of lyrical books on
nature, displaying his superb prose style.
Michelin
simple life-forms including PROTOZOANS, ALGAE, MOLDS, BACTERIA, and VIRUSES.
ICS, notably PENICILLIN. See also BACTERIOLOGY, GENETIC ENGINEERING.
microchip See INTEGRATED CIRCUIT
microcircuit See INTEGRATED CIRCUIT
micrococcus
microsurgery or micromanipulation Surgical technique for oper-
ating on minute structures, with specialized, tiny precision instruments
under observation through a microscope, sometimes equipped with cam-
eras to show the operation on a monitor. Microsurgery permits operations
that were once impossible—surgery on the delicate bones of the inner and
middle ear, reattachment of severed limbs or digits, repair of the retina,
and removal of tumours intricately embedded in vital structures.
microtubule
Middlesbrough
Miescher
Mikan
militia
Millais
Millerand
staff of Punch in 1906 and produced
successful
light comedies and a
memorable detective novel, The Red
House Mystery (1922), before verses
written for his
son Christopher
Robin grew into the collections
When We Were Very Young (1924)
and Now We Are Six (1927), which
became beloved classics. Stories
about the adventures of Christopher
Robin and the toy animals Pooh, Pig-
let, Kanga, Roo, Tigger, Rabbit,
Owl, and Eeyore are told in the
immensely popular Winnie-the-Pooh
(1926) and The House at Pooh Cor-
ner (1928).
Milne Bay Inlet of
Milner, Alfred later Viscount Milner (of St. James’s and
Milon
Mimamsa
SCIENCE.
mind-body problem Metaphysical problem of the relationship
between mind and body. The modern problem stems from the thought of
RENÉ DESCARTES, who is responsible for the classical formulation of DUAL-
ISM. Descartes’s INTERACTIONISM had many critics even in his own day. THO-
MAS HOBBES denied the existence of mental substance. MATERIALISM of a sort
was also supported by Descartes’s correspondent Pierre Gassendi (1592–
1655). BENEDICT DE SPINOZA posited a single substance of which the mental
and the material are attributes; his theory is known as psycho-physical
parallelism. More recent views include the DOUBLE-ASPECT THEOR Y, IDENTITY
THEOR Y, eliminative materialism (which denies the reality of the familiar
categories of mental state posited in so-called FOLK PSYCHOLOGY), and theo-
ries of SUPERVENIENCE.
Mindanao
applied only to women) was enacted by Massachusetts in 1912. Mini-
mum wage laws or agreements now exist in most nations.
mining Excavation of materials from the Earth’s crust, including those
of organic origin, such as coal and petroleum. Modern mining is costly
and complicated. First, a mineral vein that can likely produce enough of
the desired substance to justify the cost of extraction must be located.
Then the size of the vein or deposit is determined, and mining engineers
decide the best way to mine it. Most of the world’s yearly mineral pro-
duction is extracted by surface mining, which includes open-pit mining,
strip mining, and quarrying. For ore bodies that lie a considerable dis-
tance below the surface, underground mining must be considered. In both
techniques, excavating and extracting mineral substances involve costly
combinations of drilling, blasting, hoisting, and hauling, as well as mea-
sures for health and safety and reduction of environmental impact.
mink Either of two species of nocturnal, semiaquatic carnivores in the
WEASEL family (Mustelidae) that are
trapped and raised commercially for
their pelts. American mink (Mustela
vison),
found throughout North
America except in arid parts of the
southwestern U.S.,
is 17–29 in.
(43–74 cm) long and weighs up to
3.5 lb (1.6 kg). The Eurasian species
(M. lutreola) is slightly smaller. The
rich brown coat consists of a dense,
soft underfur overlaid with glossy
guard hairs. Except for furs in the
rare mutant colours produced by
crossbreeding, wild mink fur is more valuable than “ranch mink.”
Minkowski
Minggantu Chinese Ming Antu, Mongolian Minganto (b. ?—d.
Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co. See 3M
Mino da Fiesole
SOP, and CATNIP.
minuet
PLAY; MYSTER Y PLAY.
mirage
Mishna or Mishnah
Missouri River, Little See LITTLE MISSOURI RIVER
Misti
INDIAN; WOODLAND CULTURE.
Mistral
ily, she became known for her witty satiric novels of upper-class life,
including the quasi-autobiographical The Pursuit of Love (1945), Love in
a Cold Climate (1949), The Blessing (1951), and Don’t Tell Alfred (1960).
A volume of essays she coedited, Noblesse Oblige (1956), popularized
the distinction between linguistic usages that are “U” (upper-class) and
“non-U.” Her sister Jessica (1917–96) was a noted writer on U.S. society
whose best-known book was The American Way of Death (1963).
Mithra
order, whose powers he complements as guardian of the human order. As
spirit of the day, he is sometimes associated with the sun. His Iranian
counterpart is MITHRA.
Mitre
Moabites
the northern U.S. to Brazil; it has been introduced into Hawaii and thrives
in suburban areas. It sings from perches, even at night, and vigorously
defends its territory. Other Mimus species range from Central America to
Patagonia, and the blue mockingbird (genus Melanotis) inhabits much of
Mexico. Various subspecies of the Galápagos mockingbird (genus Neso-
mimus) inhabit the different islands.
Moctezuma II See MONTEZUMA II
modal
of industrialization, is also applied to institutions, which become more
highly specialized. Instead of being governed by tradition or custom,
society comes to be governed according to abstract principles formulated
for that purpose. Traditional religious beliefs often decline in importance,
and distinctive cultural traits are often lost.
Modersohn-Becker
(30–28 BC) and became a Roman province in AD 15. During the Dacian
Wars (AD 85–89) it was divided into two provinces: Moesia Superior and
Moesia Inferior. Despite barbarian invasions, it remained part of the East-
ern Roman Empire until the 7th century, when it was occupied by Slavs
and Bulgarians.
Mogadishu
not allowed to stand in the 2002 presidential election and was succeeded
by the winner, opposition candidate Mwai Kibaki.
Moiseyev
bet. Moldova was admitted to the UN in 1992. In 2000 it abandoned its
semipresidential form of government to become a parliamentary repub-
mole or mol
RABIA along the Black Sea coast. (See MOL-
DAVIA for history prior to 1940.) The two
regions were incorporated as the Molda-
vian Soviet Socialist Republic in 1940. In
1991 Moldavia declared independence
from the Soviet Union. It adopted the Romanian spelling of Moldova,
having earlier legitimized use of the Roman rather than the Cyrillic alpha-
Moley, Raymond (Charles) (b. Sept. 27, 1886, Berea, Ohio,
U.S.—d. Feb. 18, 1975, Phoenix, Ariz.) U.S. educator and political
adviser. He taught political science at Columbia University from 1923 to
1954. In the 1920s he prepared studies of criminal justice in a number of
cities for New York Gov. FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT. When Roosevelt was pre-
paring for his 1932 presidential campaign, Moley formed the BRAIN TRUST
to advise him on national issues. Moley wrote many of Roosevelt’s cam-
paign speeches and coined the term NEW DEAL. From 1937 to 1968 he was
a contributing editor of Newsweek magazine.
Molière
negotiated the GERMAN-SOVIET NONAGGRESSION PACT in 1939, and in World
War II he ordered the production of the crude bottle bombs later called
“Molotov cocktails.” He arranged the alliances with the U.S. and Britain
and was the Soviet spokesman at the Allied conferences during and after
the war. After being dismissed in 1956 by NIKITA KHRUSHCHEV, Molotov
joined an unsuccessful attempt to depose Khrushchev (1957) and lost all
his party offices; in 1962 he was expelled from the Communist Party.
molting Shedding or casting off of an animal’s outer layer or covering
and formation of its replacement. Regulated by hormones, molting occurs
throughout the animal kingdom. It includes the shedding and replacement
of horns, hair, skin, and feathers and the process by which a nymph or
other organism sheds an external skeleton for the purpose of growth or
change in shape.
Moltke, Helmuth (Johannes Ludwig) von (b. May 25, 1848,
Gersdorff, Mecklenburg—d. June 18, 1916, Berlin, Ger.) German soldier.
A nephew of HELMUTH VON MOLTKE, he rose rapidly in the German army and
served as adjutant to his uncle from 1882. He was appointed quartermas-
ter general in 1903 and chief of the German general staff in 1906. At the
outbreak of World War I, he applied the SCHLIEFFEN PLAN, devised by his
predecessor, but his inability to revise the plan to cope with tactical and
command errors contributed to the halt of the German offensive in the
Battle of the MARNE (1914). He was relieved of his command shortly after
and died a broken man two years later.
Moltke
At the speeds treated in classical MECHANICS, the effect of speed on the mass
can be neglected, and changes in momentum are the result of changes in
velocity alone. If a constant force acts on a particle for a given time, the
product of the force and the time interval, the impulse, is equal to the
change in momentum. For any array of several objects, the total momen-
tum is the sum of the individual momenta. See also ANGULAR MOMENTUM.
Mommsen
Monck
AND LOAN ASSOCIATIONS, and CREDIT UNIONS should be counted as part of the
money supply. CENTRAL BANKS regulate the money supply to stabilize their
national economies. See also MONETAR Y POLICY.
Möngke
MONEY.
CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT. In addition, the FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM provides con-
People’s Republic was established in 1924.
The country adopted a new constitution in
1992 and shortened its name to Mongolia.
Mongolian languages Family of
Mongoloid See RACE
monism
Monmouth
monopsony
served two terms as president, presiding in a period that became known
as the ERA OF GOOD FEELINGS. He oversaw the SEMINOLE WAR of 1817–18
and the acquisition of the Floridas (1819–21), and he signed the MISSOURI
COMPROMISE (1820). With Secretary of State JOHN QUINCY ADAMS, he devel-
oped the principles of U.S. foreign policy later called the MONROE DOC-
TRINE.
Monroe, Marilyn orig. Norma Jean Mortenson (b. June 1,
OF INFLUENCE. See also GOOD NEIGHBOR POLICY.
Monsarrat
Montale
Montesquieu
Montgomery (of Alamein), Bernard Law Montgomery, 1st
Montgomery, Wes orig. John Leslie Montgomery (b. March
See also DIRECT-MAIL MARKETING; SEARS, ROEBUCK AND COMPANY.
Montherlant
the signers of the Treaty of LAUSANNE and others met in Montreux, Switz.,
and agreed to return the zone to Turkish military control. The convention
allowed Turkey to close the straits to all warships when it was at war and
to permit merchant ships free passage. See also STRAITS QUESTION.
Montrose
Moore, Archie orig. Archibald Lee Wright (b. Dec. 13, 1913,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Moor (cid:2) moose
IMOGEN CUNNINGHAM
Marianne Moore, 1957
moraine
moray
Morgenthau
Morgan, Joe in full Joseph Leonard Morgan (b. Sept. 19, 1943,
Morisot
morphology
MORPHOLOGY.
Morpheus In Greek and Roman mythology, the god of dreams. He was
one of the sons of Hypnos (Somnus), god of sleep. Morpheus sent human
shapes of all kinds to the dreamer, while his brothers Phobetor and Phan-
tasus sent the forms of animals and inanimate objects.
morphine HETEROCYCLIC COMPOUND, NARCOTIC ANALGESIC ALKALOID originally
isolated from OPIUM. It is among the most powerful naturally occurring
CONVENTION and the CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION and served in the U.S.
DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI, EDWARD BURNE-
JONES, FORD MADOX BROWN, and oth-
THE MANSELL COLLECTION
William Morris, drawing by C.M.
Watts.
Morrison, Jim orig. James Douglas Morrison (b. Dec. 8, 1943,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Morris (cid:2) mortar
rock’s most potent, controversial, and theatrical acts. Their popular hits
of the 1960s included “Light My Fire” and “Hello I Love You.” Morri-
son was known for his drinking and drug use and outrageous stage behav-
iour. In 1971 he left the Doors to write poetry and moved to Paris, where
he died of heart failure.
Morrison, Toni orig. Chloe Anthony Wofford (b. Feb. 18, 1931,
Morristown National Historical Park Historical park, Morris-
Morse, Samuel F(inley) B(reese) (b. April 27, 1791, Charlestown,
Morton, James Douglas, 4th earl of (b. c. 1516—d. June 2, 1581,
Edinburgh, Scot.) Scottish nobleman. Appointed chancellor by MAR Y,
QUEEN OF SCOTS, in 1563, he conspired with other Protestant nobles to
murder Mary’s adviser DAVID RICCIO and probably was involved in the
murder of Lord DARNLEY. He led the nobles that drove Mary’s husband,
the earl of Bothwell, from Scotland and forced her to abdicate in favour
of her infant son, James (later JAMES I of England). He became regent for
James in 1572 and restored the rule of law to Scotland. Resented by the
other nobles, he was forced to resign in 1578; he was later charged with
complicity in Darnley’s murder and executed.
Morton, Jelly Roll orig. Ferdinand Joseph La Menthe (b. Oct.
Mosaddeq
centre of EASTERN ORTHODOXY, and the new prestige of the Russian Ortho-
dox church led to a new didactic iconography that expounded mysteries,
rites, and dogma. By the 17th century the STROGANOV SCHOOL of Moscow
artists assumed the leadership of Russian art.
Moscow State University in full Lomonosov Moscow State
Moselle River or Mosel River
shows clear ALTERNATION OF GENERATIONS between the sexual GAMETOPHYTE,
Mossad
many seriously damage forests, agricultural crops, and fabrics. See also
BAGWORM MOTH; GYPSY MOTH; HAWK MOTH; LUNA MOTH; MILLER; SATURNIID MOTH;
SILKWORM MOTH; TIGER MOTH; TUSSOCK MOTH.
ABSTRACT
EXPRESSIONISM from the
Motherwell, photograph by Arnold
Newman, 1959
MOTION; PERIODIC MOTION; SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION; SIMPLE MOTION; UNIFORM CIR-
CULAR MOTION.
© ARNOLD NEWMAN
Mother Goose (cid:2) motocross
MOUNT COMMUNICATIONS; RKO; UNITED ARTISTS; WARNER BROTHERS.
motion sickness Sickness caused by contradiction between external
data from the eyes and internal cues from the balance centre in the INNER
EAR. For example, in seasickness the inner ear senses the ship’s motion,
but the eyes see the still cabin. This stimulates stress hormones and accel-
erates stomach muscle contraction, leading to dizziness, pallor, cold
sweat, and nausea and vomiting. Minimizing changes of speed and direc-
tion may help, as may reclining, not turning the head, closing the eyes,
or focusing on distant objects. Drugs can prevent or relieve motion sick-
ness but may have side effects. Pressing an ACUPUNCTURE point on the wrist
helps some people.
motion study See TIME-AND-MOTION STUDY
ICS; HUMAN NATURE; LEARNING.
Motocross racing
KINNEY JONES
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
classes according to engine displacement (e.g., 125-, 250-, 500-cc). It is
probably the most physically demanding motorcycle sport.
Motoori Norinaga
Mountbatten family See BATTENBERG FAMILY
Mounties See ROYAL CANADIAN MOUNTED POLICE
POCKET
MOUSE.
mouse Hand-controlled electromechanical device for interacting with a
DIGITAL COMPUTER that has a GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE. The mouse can be moved
Mouskos, Mikhai Khristodolou See MAKARIOS III
Mousterian
mountain goat or Rocky Mountain goat RUMINANT (BOVID species
mountain lion See COUGAR
mountain sheep See BIGHORN
mountaineering or mountain climbing Sport of attaining, or
Mountbatten (of Burma), Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl orig.
Louis Francis Albert Victor Nicholas, prince of Battenberg
(b. June 25, 1900, Frogmore House, Windsor, Eng.—d. Aug. 27, 1979,
Donegal Bay, off Mullaghmore, County Sligo, Ire.) British statesman and
movie See MOTION PICTURE
Moynihan, Berkeley George Andrew later Baron Moyni-
han (of Leeds) (b. Oct. 2, 1865, Malta—d. Sept. 7, 1936, Carr Manor,
Leeds, Yorkshire, Eng.) British surgeon and teacher of medicine. He wrote
or cowrote authoritative monographs on surgery to treat diseases of vari-
ous abdominal organs, as well as Abdominal Operations (1905), a stan-
dard text for two decades, and Duodenal Ulcer (1910), which secured his
reputation as a clinical scientist. He stressed obtaining medical evidence
from living bodies on the operating table rather than from autopsies. He
helped found the British Journal of Surgery (1913) and organizations to
promote nationwide and international communication among surgeons
and specialists. He was raised to the peerage in 1929.
Moynihan, Daniel Patrick (b. March 16, 1927, Tulsa, Okla.,
U.S.—d. March 26, 2003, Washington, D.C.) U.S. scholar and politician.
He grew up in poverty in New York City. After serving in the U.S. navy
in World War II, he attended Tufts University, where he earned a doctor-
ate in 1961. From 1961 to 1965 he worked at the U.S. Labor Department,
where he cowrote a controversial report that attributed the educational
problems of African Americans to the instability of urban African Ameri-
can families. He taught at Harvard (1966–77) and held advisory posts in
the administration of RICHARD NIXON. He was ambassador to India (1973–
75) and U.S. representative to the UN (1975–76). He ran successfully for
the U.S. Senate from New York in 1976; though he was a Democrat, his
candidacy was opposed by many Democratic liberals. Reelected three
times, he retired in 2001. In 2000 he received the Presidential Medal of
Freedom.
Mozambique
MRI See MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
MS See MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
MS-DOS
clan shrine when the ancestral home was too small to accommodate all
its members and a new site had to be blessed. The main ceremony con-
sisted of taking ashes from the hearth of the ancestral shrine (kuala) and
transferring them to the shrine at the new location, which was then con-
sidered a subsidiary of the ancestral kuala.
mudra
chosen people, prompted his most famous disciple, MALCOLM X, to break
with the group in 1964. He moderated his views in his later years.
Mueammad !Abd al-Ra#)f al-Qudwah al-husaynl See Y0SIR
!ARAF0T
Mueammad !All (b. 1769, Kavala, Macedonia, Ottoman Empire—d.
Aug. 2, 1849, Alexandria, Egypt) Viceroy of Egypt (1805–48) for the
OTTOMAN EMPIRE and founder of the dynasty that ruled Egypt until 1953.
He reorganized Egyptian society in the aftermath of the Napoleonic occu-
pation, eliminating the remnants of the MamlHks (see MAMLãK DYNASTY),
restricting native merchants and artisans, and stamping out peasant rebel-
lions. He nationalized most land, introduced the cultivation of cash crops,
and attempted to develop modern industry, but his efforts were under-
mined by a lack of trained workers, the deleterious effects of excessive
taxation, and a common disaffection with peasant conscription. He suc-
ceeded in securing for his family the hereditary right to rule Egypt and
The Sudan (1841), which opened the way to eventual independence from
Ottoman domination. See also !ABB0S I.
Mueammad ibn !Abd al-Karlm al-Kha$$)bl See ABD EL-KRIM
Mueammad ibn Tughluq
mullah
Mumbai
Munda
Asia and introduced into England and France, that constitute the genus
Muntiacus (family Cervidae). Named for their cry, most species stand
15–25 in. (40–65 cm) high, weigh 33–77 lbs (15–35 kg), and are gray-
ish, reddish, or brown. Males have tusklike upper canine teeth and short
one-branched antlers. Bony ridges extend from the antler base onto the
face. The giant muntjac (88–110 lbs, or 40–50 kg) was discovered in
northern Vietnam in 1993–94. Fea’s muntjac (M. feae), of Myanmar and
Thailand, is endangered, and other muntjac species are threatened.
Müntzer
MureÃ
murre
TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY (TVA). The city of Muscle Shoals (pop., 2000:
11,924) developed from the TVA complex in the Wilson Dam area.
muscle tumour Abnormal tissue growth in or originating from MUSCLE
tissue. There are three major types. Leiomyomas are tumours of smooth
muscles, seen most often in the uterus but also in the digestive, urinary,
and female genital systems. Part of the tumour may become malignant,
but it usually does not spread or recur. Rhabdomyomas occur most often
in cardiac muscle. Some forms spread, and it may remain contained in
tissue or become diffuse and hard to remove. Rhabdomyomas involving
both smooth and striated muscle are often malignant and may grow very
large. The several types of rhabdomyosarcoma are rare; they arise in skel-
etal muscle, usually in the leg or arm, and are extremely malignant.
muscovite
one of the game’s great hitters. His
lifetime totals of hits (3,630), runs
(1,949), and times at bat were second
only to those of TY COBB, his total of
runs batted in (1,951) was the fourth-
highest of all time, and his total of
extra-base hits (1,477) was only sur-
passed later by HANK AARON. Popular
among fans for his unfailing gra-
ciousness, he became a Cardinals
executive after retirement.
music Art concerned with combin-
ing vocal or instrumental sounds for
beauty of form or emotional expres-
sion, usually according to cultural
standards of rhythm, melody, and, in
most Western music,
Music most often implies sounds
with distinct PITCHes that are arranged
into MELODIES and organized into pat-
terns of RHYTHM AND METRE. The melody will usually be in a certain KEY or
MODE, and in Western music it will often suggest harmony that may be
made explicit as accompanying CHORDs or COUNTERPOINT. Music is an art
that, in one guise or another, permeates every human society. It is used
for such varied social purposes as ritual, worship, coordination of move-
ment, communication, and entertainment.
music box Mechanical musical instrument in which projecting pins on
a revolving brass cylinder or disk, encoding a piece of music, pluck tuned
PICTORIAL PARADE-EB INC.
HARMONY.
Musial
A mushroom typically consists of a stalk (stipe) and a cap (pileus). As the mushroom
develops from an underground mycelium and pushes upward, it is protected by a
thin membrane (universal veil), which eventually ruptures, leaving fragments on the
cap. Another membrane, attaching the cap to the stalk, also ruptures, allowing the
cap to expand and leaving a remnant ring (annulus) on the stalk. Radiating rows of
gills are found on the cap’s undersurface; these bear the club-shaped reproductive
structures (basidia) which form minute spores known as basidiospores, of which a
single mushroom may produce millions.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
music (cid:2) musicology
steel
tongues.
It was probably
invented c. 1780 in Switzerland.
With its modular cylinders or disks,
it was a popular domestic instrument
until displaced by the player piano
and phonograph.
music hall and variety the-
COURTESY OF THE MUSICAL WONDER HOUSE, WISCASSET,
MAINE; PHOTOGRAPH, JOHN SPINKS
German music box, with disk in play-
ing position, from Leipzig, c. 1900
atre Popular entertainment that fea-
tured successive acts by singers,
comedians, dancers, and actors. The
form derived from the taproom con-
certs given in city taverns in England
in the 18th–19th centuries. To meet
the demand for entertainment for the working class, tavern owners often
annexed nearby buildings as music halls, where drinking and smoking
were permitted. The originator of the English music hall as such was
Charles Morton, who built Morton’s Canterbury Hall (1852) and Oxford
Hall (1861) in London. Leading performers included LILLIE LANGTR Y, Harry
Lauder (1870–1950), and GRACIE FIELDS. Music halls evolved into larger,
more respectable variety theatres, such as London’s Hippodrome and the
Coliseum. Variety acts combined music, comedy acts, and one-act plays
and featured celebrities such as SARAH BERNHARDT and HERBERT TREE. See also
VAUDEVILLE.
GERSHWIN and IRA GERSHWIN, COLE PORTER, RICHARD RODGERS, and OSCAR HAM-
muskellunge
on GAMAL ABDEL NASSER, it operated clandestinely in the 1960s and ’70s.
Beginning in the late 1980s, it experienced an upsurge; though its can-
didates were often listed under other parties, Brotherhood candidates com-
peted in legislative elections in Egypt and Jordan.
Muslim calendar See Muslim CALENDAR
Muslim League orig. All India Muslim League Political group
Musset
rial of EVOLUTION.
Mu!tazilah
mycelium
family Myrtaceae, commonly called the myrtle family, includes the plants
that produce the spices ALLSPICE and CLOVES, and the genus Eucalyptus. See
also CRAPE MYRTLE.
Mysore
NAACP in full National Association for the Advancement
Nabis
sus Mountains. Suspicious of those around him and capriciously cruel, he
was assassinated by his own troops.
NAFTA in full North American Free Trade Agreement Trade
pact signed by Canada, the U.S., and Mexico in 1992, which took effect
in 1994. Inspired by the success of the EUROPEAN COMMUNITY in reducing
trade barriers among its members, NAFTA created the world’s largest
free-trade area. It basically extended to Mexico the provisions of a 1988
Canada-U.S. free-trade agreement, calling for elimination of all trade bar-
riers over a 15-year period, granting U.S. and Canadian companies access
to certain Mexican markets, and incorporating agreements on labour and
the environment. See also GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE; WORLD
TRADE ORGANIZATION.
Nag Hammadi
nahual See NAGUAL
Nahuatl
century. It is the area’s commercial centre and site of the Wat Mahathudu
temple complex. The town is noted for its NIELLO work in silver.
Nalanda
Nanda dynasty Family that ruled Magadha, in northern India (c.
343–c. 321 BC). Legends regarding the low-class origins and ruthless con-
quests of its founder, Mahapadma, are supported by classical scholarship.
The brief period of Nanda rule, along with the succeeding and more
lengthy tenure of the MAUR YAN EMPIRE, represent the political aspect of a
great transitional epoch in which settled agriculture and the growing use
of iron resulted in production surpluses and the growth of cities. There
are references to the wealth of the Nandas, their sizable military, and
administrative initiatives such as irrigation projects.
Nanga Parbat
Napata
ULM and AUSTERLITZ (1805), JENA AND AUERSTEDT (1806), and FRIEDLAND (1807)
nappe
Narmada River
Nashe
nasturtium
National Aeronautics and Space Administration See NASA
National Assembly French Assemblée Nationale French par-
National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People See NAACP
National Basketball Association (NBA) U.S. professional bas-
ketball league. It was formed in 1949 by the merger of two rival orga-
nizations,
the National Basketball League (founded 1937) and the
Basketball Association of America (1946). In 1976 the NBA was aug-
mented by the absorption of four teams from the former American Bas-
ketball Association (founded 1967). The NBA membership is divided into
two conferences, each with three divisions. The Eastern Conference con-
sists of the Atlantic Division (Boston Celtics, New Jersey Nets, New York
Knicks, Philadelphia 76ers, Toronto Raptors), the Central Division (Chi-
cago Bulls, Cleveland Cavaliers, Detroit Pistons, Indiana Pacers, Mil-
waukee Bucks), and the Southeast Division (Atlanta Hawks, Charlotte
Bobcats, Miami Heat, Orlando Magic, Washington Wizards). The West-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Nation (cid:2) National Film Board of Canada
National Broadcasting Company See NBC
National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Organiza-
National Convention French Convention Nationale Govern-
and employment. See also DEFICIT FINANCING; JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES.
National Education Association (NEA) Voluntary association of
U.S. teachers, administrators, and other educators associated with elemen-
tary and secondary schools and colleges and universities. Founded in 1857
as the National Teachers Assn., it is among the world’s largest profes-
sional organizations. Operating much like a LABOUR UNION, it represents its
members through numerous state and local affiliates. It seeks to improve
the schools and working conditions, advance the cause of public educa-
tion, promote federal legislation, and sponsor research.
National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) Independent agency of
National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) U.S. inde-
pendent agency. Founded in 1965, it supports research, education, pres-
ervation, and public programs in the HUMANITIES. It provides grants to
museums, libraries, archives, television programs, historic sites, transla-
tion and editorial projects by academic presses, educational and research
institutions, and individuals.
National Film Board of Canada (NFB) Canadian department of
1332 I National Football League (cid:2) National League
SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION. It was founded in 1937 when ANDREW W. MELLON
JACQUES-YVES COUSTEAU, JANE GOODALL, and DIAN FOSSEY. It has published
numerous books, atlases, and bulletins and has created hundreds of tele-
vision documentaries. National Geographic Magazine is a monthly maga-
zine of geography, archaeology, anthropology, and exploration. It became
a leader in reproducing colour photographs and printing photographs of
undersea life, views from the stratosphere, and animals in their natural
habitats. It also became famous for articles containing substantial infor-
mation on environmental, social, and cultural aspects of the regions cov-
ered. See also GILBERT GROSVENOR.
National Guard, U.S. Reserve group organized by the U.S. Army
and Air Force. Every state and territory of the U.S. has a National Guard,
which can be called on by state governors during emergencies such as
riots and natural disasters. Guard units may also be ordered into active
duty for up to two years by the U.S. president in the event of a national
emergency. Enlistment in the National Guard is voluntary.
National Health Service (NHS) Comprehensive government
public-health service in Britain covering virtually the entire population,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
the STANLEY CUP.
National Institutes of Health (NIH) U.S. government agency that
conducts or supports biomedical research. It is made up of numerous spe-
cialized institutes (e.g., National Cancer Institute; National Heart, Lung,
and Blood Institute; National Institute on Aging; National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development; and National Institute of Mental
Health). Part of the Department of Health and Human Services, it also
trains health researchers; disseminates information; and maintains other
offices and divisions, the National Library of Medicine (the foremost
source of medical information in the U.S.), and several research centres.
National Labor Relations Act See WAGNER ACT
National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) U.S. government
agency charged with administering the National Labor Relations Act
(1935). The three-member NLRB, appointed by the president, organizes
elections to determine whether employees wish to be represented by a
LABOUR UNION in COLLECTIVE BARGAINING and monitors labour practices by
employers and unions. It does not initiate investigations; its involvement
must be sought by employers, individuals, or unions. Though it lacks
enforcement power for its orders, it can prosecute cases in court.
National League (NL) Oldest existing U.S. major-league profes-
sional baseball organization. The league was founded in 1876. Its
supremacy was challenged by several rival organizations over the years,
of which only the AMERICAN LEAGUE has survived; beginning in 1903, the
champions of the two leagues have engaged in an annual WORLD SERIES
competition. Today the National League consists of 16 teams aligned in
three divisions. In the Eastern Division are the Atlanta Braves, Florida
Marlins (Miami), New York Mets, Philadelphia Phillies, and Washington
(D.C.) Nationals. In the Central Division are the Chicago Cubs, Cincin-
nati Reds, Houston Astros, Milwaukee Brewers, Pittsburgh Pirates, and
St. Louis Cardinals. In the Western Division are the Arizona Diamond-
backs (Phoenix), Colorado Rockies (Denver), Los Angeles Dodgers, San
Diego Padres, and San Francisco Giants.
National Liberal Party German Nationalliberale Partei
SANDINISTAS.
National Organization for Women (NOW) U.S. women’s
National Party in full National Party of South Africa South
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
National Liberal Party (cid:2) National Socialism I
National Recovery Administration (NRA) (1933–35) U.S. gov-
ernment agency established to stimulate business recovery during the
GREAT DEPRESSION. As part of the National Industrial Recovery Act (1933),
the NRA established codes to eliminate unfair trade practices, reduce
unemployment, and set minimum wages and maximum hours. The U.S.
Supreme Court
invalidated the act
in 1935 because it gave quasi-
legislative powers to the executive branch. Many of its provisions
appeared in subsequent legislation.
National Republican Party U.S. political party formed after the
Jeffersonian Republicans split
in 1825. The National Republicans
included followers of JOHN QUINCY ADAMS and HENR Y CLAY and opponents
of ANDREW JACKSON. Adams, the incumbent president, ran as the party’s
unsuccessful candidate in the 1828 presidential election. Its 1832 presi-
dential nominee was Clay, whose platform endorsing a high tariff, inter-
nal improvements, and the BANK OF THE UNITED STATES (see BANK WAR). After
losing again to Jackson, the party joined with conservatives and other
anti-Jackson forces to form the WHIG PARTY.
National Rifle Association (NRA) Governing organization for the
National Security Council (NSC) U.S. agency that advises the
Nationalist Party or Kuomintang or Guomindang
Natural Bridges National Monument National monument,
southeastern Utah, U.S. Comprising three large natural bridges carved by
two winding streams, it was established in 1908. The largest bridge,
Sipapu, is 222 ft (68 m) high and spans 261 ft (80 m). Pictographs were
carved on another of the bridges, Kachina, by early cliff dwellers.
natural childbirth Any of the systems (e.g., the Lamaze method) of
managing birth without drugs or surgery. All begin with classes to teach
pregnant women about the birth process, including when to push and what
breathing and relaxation techniques to use at which stage. The goal is to
reduce fear and muscle tension, which can increase the pain of labour,
and to make the mother an active participant in the process. The father
or another partner usually attends the classes with the mother and coaches
her during the birth. See also MIDWIFER Y; OBSTETRICS AND GYNECOLOGY.
natural law In JURISPRUDENCE and POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY, a system of right
or justice common to all humankind and derived from nature rather than
from the rules of society, or positive law. The concept can be traced to
ARISTOTLE, who held that what was “just by nature” was not always the
same as what was “just by law.” In one form or another, the existence of
natural law was asserted by the Stoics (see STOICISM), CICERO, the Roman
jurists, St. PAUL, St. AUGUSTINE, GRATIAN, St. THOMAS AQUINAS, JOHN DUNS
of reality: DUALISM and MONISM, ATHEISM and THEISM, IDEALISM and materialism
nature/nurture controversy See BEHAVIOUR GENETICS
Naucratis
trade and cultural relations between Greece and Egypt. It declined after
ALEXANDER THE GREAT’s conquest of Egypt and the founding of ALEXANDRIA
in 332 BC. In 1884 archaeologist FLINDERS PETRIE discovered the site and
helped excavate it.
Nauru
Navarra English Navarre
Nazarene
Nebuchadnezzar II See NEBUCHADREZZAR II
Nebuchadrezzar
taining canvas stamped with a design and all the materials needed for the
project, were sold as early as the mid-18th century. See also BARGELLO.
Nefertiti
Neilson
WICCA.
Neo-Thomism
works of MARTIN HEIDEGGER.
Neo-Paganism Any of several movements that attempt to revive the
polytheistic religions of Europe and the Middle East. Largely a product
materials to form the active elements for certain solid-state LASERS. Glass
containing a mixture of neodymium and praseodymium (another rare
earth element) is used in glassblowers’ goggles.
neofascism Political philosophy and movement that arose in Europe
in the decades following World War II. Like earlier fascist movements,
neofascism advocated extreme nationalism, opposed liberal individual-
ism, attacked Marxist and other left-wing ideologies, indulged in racist
and xenophobic scapegoating, and promoted populist right-wing eco-
nomic programs. Unlike the fascists, however, neofascists placed more
blame for their countries’ problems on non-European immigrants than on
leftists and Jews, displayed little interest in taking lebensraum (German:
“living space”) through the military conquest of other states, and made
concerted efforts to portray themselves as democratic and “mainstream.”
The National Front in France, led by JEAN-MARIE LE PEN, and the Liberal-
Democratic Party in Russia, led by Vladimir Zhirinovsky, are often cited
as neofascist.
Neolithic
but more common of the two types of JADE and may be distinguished from
JADEITE by its splintery fracture and oily lustre. Nephrite occurs in low-
grade (formed under low-temperature, low-pressure conditions), region-
ally metamorphosed rocks. Important deposits occur in China, Siberia,
New Zealand, Switzerland, Alaska, and Wyoming.
nephritis
destroyed much of Rome; he perse-
cuted the Christians as scapegoats
and proceeded to build a garish pal-
ace, the Domus Aurea, on lands that
had been privately held. With his
reign in decline, he murdered his
wife, Octavia, as well as her succes-
sor, Poppaea, ordered Seneca to kill
himself, and executed senators who
criticized him. Revolts in Gaul and
Spain were led by GALBA, who was
declared emperor by his army. Nero
came to be regarded as mad, giving
public lyre and theatrical perfor-
mances to the disgust of his subjects.
Condemned by the Senate, he chose
suicide over execution.
Nerses
1346 I
nest (cid:2) Netherlands
JEFF FOOTT/BRUCE COLEMAN INC.
Nest of the American robin.
Netherlands, Austrian See AUSTRIAN NETHERLANDS
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
byname Holland Country, northwestern Europe. Area: 16,034 sq mi
(41,528 sq km). Population (2005 est.): 16,300,000. Capital: AMSTERDAM.
MAS à Kempis, and DESIDERIUS ERASMUS. CALVINISM and ANABAPTIST doctrines
attracted many followers. In 1581 the seven northern provinces, led by
Calvinists, declared their independence from Spain, and in 1648, follow-
ing the THIRTY YEARS’ WAR, Spain recognized Dutch independence. The 17th
century was the golden age of Dutch civilization. Benedict de SPINOZA and
RENÉ DESCARTES enjoyed the intellectual freedom, and REMBRANDT and
JOHANNES VERMEER painted their masterpieces. The Dutch EAST INDIA CO.
Netherlands Antilles
neuralgia
Neusiedler
New Britain formerly Neu-Pommern
New England Region, northeastern U.S. It consists of the states of
Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Con-
necticut and has an area of 66,667 sq mi (172,668 sq km). Named by
JOHN SMITH, who explored its shores in 1614, it was later settled by English
Puritans (see PURITANISM). The New England colonies, fueled by self-
sufficient farmers, evolved representative governments. The area’s numer-
ous harbours soon promoted the growth of overseas commerce and a
vigorous shipbuilding industry. In the 18th century it became a hotbed of
agitation for independence from Britain, and its patriots played leading
roles in the AMERICAN REVOLUTION.
New England Confederation or United Colonies of New
England Organization of four American colonies. In 1643 delegates
from Massachusetts, Connecticut, New Haven, and Plymouth met to solve
trade, boundary, and religious disputes and to form a common defense
against the French, Dutch, and Indians. They drew up articles of agree-
ment and established a directorate of eight commissioners. The confed-
eration was weakened by its advisory status and by the 1665 merger of
Connecticut and New Haven. It was active in KING PHILIP’S WAR but dis-
solved in 1684 when the Massachusetts charter was revoked.
New England Range Upland area, northeastern NEW SOUTH WALES,
Australia. Part of the GREAT DIVIDING RANGE, it stretches about 200 mi (320
km) parallel to the eastern coast, constituting Australia’s largest plateau
region. The highest point, Round Mountain, is 5,300 ft (1,615 m). New
England National Park, on the eastern slope of the range, is one of sev-
eral semitropical and temperate rainforest areas designated a UNESCO
WORLD HERITAGE SITE in 1986.
New England Renaissance See AMERICAN RENAISSANCE
the explorations by SAMUEL DE CHAMPLAIN, JACQUES MARQUETTE, LA SALLE, LOUIS
New Guinea Indonesian Irian
1352 I New Model Army (cid:2) New Spain
New Orleans jazz See DIXIELAND
New Realism Early 20th-century movement in METAPHYSICS and EPISTE-
MOLOGY that opposed the IDEALISM dominant in British and U.S. universi-
ties. Early leaders included WILLIAM JAMES, BERTRAND RUSSELL, and G. E.
MOORE, who adopted the term REALISM to signal their opposition to ideal-
ism. In 1910 William Pepperel Montague, Ralph Barton Perry, and oth-
ers signed an article entitled “The Program and First Platform of Six
Realists,” and followed it with a cooperative volume, The New Realism
(1912). In defending the independence of known things, New Realism
affirmed that in cognition “the content of knowledge, that which lies in
or before the mind when knowledge takes place, is numerically identical
with the thing known” (a form of direct realism). To some realists, this
epistemological MONISM seemed unable to give a satisfactory explanation
of the mind’s proneness to error.
new religious movement (NRM) Any religion originating in
New School University formerly New School for Social
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
TRUFFAUT, JEAN-LUC GODARD, LOUIS MALLE, ERIC ROHMER, ALAIN RESNAIS, and oth-
CHIN MONKEYS and SQUIRREL MONKEYS; and the durukulis. See also OLD WORLD
MONKEY.
New Year’s Day First day of the new year, celebrated with religious,
cultural, and social observances around the world. It is usually marked by
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
New Sweden (cid:2) New York City
New York, State University of (SUNY) Largest university sys-
TALLCHIEF, EDWARD VILLELLA, JACQUES D’AMBOISE, and SUZANNE FARRELL.
York. See also ACTION PAINTING.
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) World’s largest marketplace
also AMERICAN STOCK EXCHANGE; NASDAQ.
Newar
Newark
1356 I Newport (cid:2) Newton
news agency or news service or wire service Organization that
gathers, writes, and distributes news to newspapers, periodicals, radio and
television broadcasters, government agencies, and other users. It does not
publish news itself but supplies news to subscribers, who, by sharing
costs, obtain services they could not otherwise afford. All the mass media
depend on agencies for the bulk of the news they carry. Some agencies
focus on special subjects or on a local area or nation. Many news agen-
cies are cooperatives, with members providing news from their area to a
pool for general use. The largest news agencies are United Press Inter-
national, ASSOCIATED PRESS, REUTERS, and AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Warty newt (Triturus cristatus)
TONI ANGERMAYER
Newtown Saint Boswells
Nguni were dispersed from their original homeland in what is now East-
ern Cape province and KwaZulu-Natal by the MFECANE disturbances of
the 1820s and the expansion of European power.
Nguyen
Nicias
Nicholas II Russian Nikolay Aleksandrovich (b. May 18, 1868,
Nicholas V orig. Tommaso Parentucelli (b. Nov. 15, 1397, Sar-
Nichols, Mike orig. Michael Igor Peschkowsky (b. Nov. 6,
Nicopolis
Niemöller
important are the POTATO, EGGPLANT, TOMATO, garden PEPPER, TOBACCO, and
nihilism
STRASSER.
THRUSH).
Nightingale, Florence (b. May 12, 1820, Florence, Italy—d. Aug.
13, 1910, London, Eng.) Italian-born British nurse, founder of trained
nursing as a profession. As a volunteer nurse, she was put in charge of
their own company, he and his sister, BRONISLAVA NIJINSKA, trained further
in St. Petersburg, and he joined the MARIINSKY THEATRE company in 1907.
With his spectacular leaps and unrivaled grace, he was an immediate suc-
cess, dancing leading roles in Giselle, Swan Lake, and Sleeping Beauty,
often with ANNA PAVLOVA and TAMARA KARSAVINA. In 1909 he joined the new
BALLETS RUSSES, and he created many roles in MICHEL FOKINE’s ballets, includ-
ing Carnaval, Les Sylphides, Le Spectre de la rose, Petrushka, and Daph-
nis and Chloe. In 1912–13 he choreographed The Afternoon of a Faun,
Jeux, and The Rite of Spring, all of which caused scandals. His marriage
in 1913 led to his dismissal from the company by his mentor, SERGEY
DIAGHILEV. He continued to perform but with less success. His intensify-
ing mental illness led to his retirement in 1919, and he lived mostly in
mental institutions in Switzerland, France, and England until his death.
His status as a legend is unequaled in the history of dance.
Nijmegen
Nimeiri
plains and Nebraska’s sandhills and low plains, it joins the MISSOURI RIVER
at the village of Niobrara, Neb., at the South Dakota line. It is 431 mi
(694 km) long. The AGATE FOSSIL BEDS NATIONAL MONUMENT is located on
the river, north of Scottsbluff, Neb.
Nipigon
structure (see HETEROCYCLIC COMPOUND). See also NITROGEN CYCLE.
nitrogen narcosis or nitrogen euphoria or raptures of the
deep Effects of breathing nitrogen under increased pressure. In divers
breathing compressed air, nitrogen saturates the nervous system, causing
an intoxicating light-headed, numb feeling, then slowed reasoning and
dexterity, and then emotional instability and irrationality. Severe cases
progress to convulsions and blackout. Susceptibility varies, and severity
increases with depth, but there are no aftereffects. Physical function
remains normal, and divers may be unaware of the growing irrationality
that can cause them to rise too fast (see DECOMPRESSION SICKNESS) or let their
air supply run out. Helium, which dissolves less easily in body tissues, is
substituted for nitrogen for deep dives.
nitroglycerin
Njáls
in the House of Commons (1929–31, 1936–70)
and in ministerial posts (1945–61). He helped
draft the UN charter, and he campaigned widely
for peace through multilateral disarmament. An
Olympic runner in 1912, 1920, and 1924, he
later served as president of UNESCO’s Inter-
national Council on Sport and Physical Recre-
ation (1960–82). In 1959 he was awarded the
Nobel Prize for Peace.
Nogi Maresuke
nökhör
they also disburse. See also AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL; GREENPEACE; WORLD
WILDLIFE FUND.
Nonni River See NEN RIVER
Nono, Luigi (b. Jan. 29, 1924, Venice, Italy—d. May 8, 1990, Venice)
Italian composer. A law student, he also studied music with Gian
Francesco Malipiero (1882–1973), Bruno Maderna (1920–73), and Her-
mann Scherchen (1891–1966). He came to public attention in 1950 with
his work Variazioni Canoniche, orchestral variations on a 12-tone theme
of ARNOLD SCHOENBERG, whose daughter Nuria he married in 1955. An
avowed communist, Nono often produced works of political substance,
many of which sparked controversy and reaction. He employed aleatory
(chance) techniques and SERIALISM, sometimes fragmenting language and
using electronically manipulated sounds. His best-known work is the
opera Intolleranza (1961).
nonobjective art See ABSTRACT ART
Nonpartisan League Alliance of U.S. farmers to gain protection
from wheat monopolies. Founded in North Dakota in 1915 by Arthur
Townley,
it demanded that mills, grain elevators, banks, and hail-
insurance companies be state owned. In 1916 its candidate, Lynn Frazier,
was elected governor of North Dakota, and the state legislature enacted
its program in 1919. The league declined after the 1920s and affiliated
with the Democrats in 1956.
nonrepresentational art See ABSTRACT ART
nonsense verse Humorous or whimsical verse that features absurd
characters and actions and often contains evocative but meaningless
words coined for the verse. It is unlike the ritualistic gibberish of chil-
dren’s counting-out rhymes in that it makes such words sound purpose-
ful. It differs from other comic verse in its resistance to any rational or
allegorical interpretation. Most nonsense verse has been written for chil-
dren and is modern, dating from the beginning of the 19th century.
Examples include EDWARD LEAR’s Book of Nonsense (1846), LEWIS CARROLL’s
“Jabberwocky” (1871), and HILAIRE BELLOC’s Bad Child’s Book of Beasts
(1896). See also LIMERICK.
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs See NSAIDS
Nootka
Noriega
Norodom Sihanouk
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
lowing the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR, it annulled the secession order and abol-
ished slavery, and it was readmitted to the Union in 1868. In the 1940s
its economy improved as some of the nation’s largest military installa-
tions, including Fort Bragg, were located there. It has a large rural popu-
lation but is also the leading industrial state of its region, and it has an
expanding high technology industry in the Raleigh-Durham area. Prod-
ucts include tobacco, corn, and furniture.
North Carolina, Regulators of See REGULATORS of North Carolina
North Cascades National Park National park, northwestern
North Star See POLARIS
Northampton, Henry Howard, earl of (b. Feb. 25, 1540, Shot-
tesham, Norfolk, Eng.—d. June 15, 1614, London) English noble noted
for his intrigues in the reigns of ELIZABETH I and JAMES I. Younger brother of
the 4th duke of NORFOLK, he was implicated in efforts to free MAR Y, QUEEN
OF SCOTS. He successfully sought favour with the Scottish king James VI,
who, on his accession as James I of England, made Howard a privy coun-
cillor (1603) and earl of Northampton (1604). As a judge at the trials of
WALTER RALEIGH (1603) and GUY FAWKES (1605), he pressed for conviction.
Northamptonshire
houses from as early as the 13th century. The county was largely pro-
Parliament during the ENGLISH CIVIL WARS. It combines traditional rural life
with a modern economy of varied industries in centres such as NORTHAMP-
TON, the county seat, and Corby.
Northcliffe (of Saint Peter), Alfred Charles William Harms-
Northern Dvina
Northern Wei dynasty or Toba dynasty (AD 386–534/35)
Northrop
Norway lobster See SCAMPI
Norwich
sula on the northern Honshu coast, it extends north for 50 mi (80 km) and
has a width of about 19 mi (30 km). The town of Wajima, on the pen-
insula’s northern coast, is known for its women pearl divers and its pro-
duction of elaborate lacquerware. Parts of the peninsula were designated
national park land in 1968.
Nôtre, André Le See André LE NÔTRE
Notre Dame, University of Private university in Notre Dame, near
South Bend, Indiana, U.S. It was founded in 1842 and reorganized in the
1920s; it became coeducational in 1972. It is affiliated with the Roman
Catholic church. It has colleges of arts and letters, science, engineering,
and business administration. It also has a graduate school and a law
school.
Notre-Dame de Paris
Novara
natural rights of its citizens. Nozick emphasized that the minimal state as
he envisioned it could encompass smaller communities in which the cen-
tral public authority would have more than minimal powers. Because each
such community would be free to realize its own idea of the good soci-
ety, the minimal state, according to Nozick, constitutes a “framework for
utopia.”
NPR See NATIONAL PUBLIC RADIO
NRA See NATIONAL RECOVER Y ADMINISTRATION, NATIONAL RIFLE ASSN.
NSAIDs
construction and operation of nuclear reactors and other facilities and the
ownership and use of nuclear materials. It issues standards, rules, and
regulations for the maintenance of licenses, and it regularly inspects
nuclear facilities to ensure compliance with public health and safety, envi-
ronmental quality, national security, and antitrust laws. The NRC also
investigates nuclear accidents, conducts public hearings, and reviews
power-plant operations. Its commissioners are appointed by the president
of the U.S.
Under Water Treaty that prohibits all tests of NUCLEAR WEAPONs except
those conducted underground. U.S.-Soviet test-ban talks began after con-
cerns arose in the 1940s and ’50s about the dangers of radioactive fallout
from above-ground nuclear tests. These talks made little progress until
the CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS of 1962. In the following year, Britain, the U.S.,
and the Soviet Union signed the treaty, and more than 100 other govern-
ments soon followed. France and China were notable nonsignatories. In
1996 the treaty was replaced by the Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty,
which will not take effect until it is signed by all 44 countries with nuclear
power plants. India refuses to do so on the ground that the treaty lacks
disarmament provisions and permits nonexplosive testing. See also
NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY.
nuclear weapon or atomic weapon or thermonuclear
weapon Bomb or other warhead that derives its force from NUCLEAR FIS-
SION, NUCLEAR FUSION, or both and is delivered by an aircraft, missile, or
other system. Fission weapons, commonly known as ATOMIC BOMBs, release
energy by splitting the nuclei of uranium or plutonium atoms; fusion
weapons, known as HYDROGEN BOMBs or thermonuclear bombs, fuse nuclei
of the hydrogen isotopes tritium or deuterium. Most modern nuclear
weapons actually combine both processes. Nuclear weapons are the most
potent explosive devices ever invented. Their destructive effects include
not only a blast equivalent to thousands of tons of TNT but also blinding
light, searing heat, and lethal radioactive FALLOUT. The number of nuclear
weapons reached its peak in the 1980s, when the U.S. had some 33,000
and the Soviet Union 38,000. Since the end of the Cold War both coun-
tries have decommissioned or dismantled thousands of warheads. Other
declared nuclear powers are the United Kingdom, France, China, India,
and Pakistan. Israel is widely assumed to possess nuclear weapons, and
North Korea, Iran, and Iraq often have been accused of seeking to build
them. Some countries, such as South Africa, Brazil, and Argentina, have
acknowledged pursuing nuclear weapons in the past but have abandoned
their programs. See also NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY; NUCLEAR TEST-
BAN TREATY.
nucleic
See also COMPUTED AXIAL TOMOGRAPHY; DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING; POSITRON EMISSION
TOMOGRAPHY; RADIATION THERAPY; RADIOLOGY.
NUCLEAR TEST-BAN TREATY.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) U.S. independent REGU-
LATOR Y AGENCY that oversees the civilian use of nuclear energy. Established
in 1974 to replace the Atomic Energy Commission, the NRC licenses the
nucleoprotein
Numidia
tribes in his immediate area. During this time, he also established a Man-
chu state and enlisted the scholar Erdeni to create a Manchu writing sys-
tem. He organized his troops under the BANNER SYSTEM. In 1616 Nurhachi
proclaimed himself KHAN and called his dynasty Jin, harking back to the
Juchen Jin dynasty of the 12th century. In 1626 he was defeated by the
Chinese and died of battle wounds. See also HONGTAIJI; QING DYNASTY.
N)rl al-Sa!ld
nymphaeum
ied with the intent of causing harm, are sometimes called obia. A person
who uses the power of obia is called an obiama or obiaman.
object-oriented programming (OOP) Computer programming
Obote
VIOLET RADIATION, X-RAYs) from above the ATMOSPHERE. STONEHENGE may have
observatories include ARECIBO OBSERVATOR Y; MOUNT WILSON OBSERVATOR Y;
PALOMAR OBSERVATOR Y; and ROYAL GREENWICH OBSERVATOR Y.
obsessive-compulsive disorder Mental disorder in which an indi-
vidual experiences obsessions or compulsions, either singly or together.
An obsession is a persistent disturbing preoccupation with an unreason-
able idea or feeling (such as of being contaminated through shaking hands
with someone). A compulsion is an irresistible impulse to perform an irra-
tional act (such as repeatedly washing the hands). The two phenomena
are usually, but not always, linked in the obsessive-compulsive person.
Onset of the illness has been linked to malregulation of the neurotrans-
mitter SEROTONIN as well as to the ill effects of high STRESS.
obsidian Natural glass of volcanic origin that is formed by the rapid
cooling of viscous LAVA. It has a glassy lustre and is slightly harder than
window glass. It is typically jet black, but the presence of hematite (iron
oxide) produces red and brown varieties, and tiny gas bubbles may cre-
ate a golden sheen. It is sometimes used as a semiprecious stone. Obsid-
ian was used by American Indians and others for weapons, implements,
tools, and ornaments, and by the ancient Aztecs and Greeks for mirrors.
obstetrics and gynecology
ocean perch See REDFISH
Oceania
the U.S. wanted to end the Occupation in 1947, the Soviet Union vetoed
a peace treaty with Japan; a treaty was signed in 1951, and the Occupa-
tion ended the following year.
occupational disease Illness associated with a particular occupation.
The Industrial Revolution’s long working hours, dim light, lack of fresh
air, and dangerous machinery fostered illness and injury in general, but
certain occupations (e.g., mining) carry particular risks (e.g., black lung,
a type of PNEUMOCONIOSIS). Twentieth-century innovations (including use
of new chemicals and radioactive materials) caused an increase in certain
cancers (e.g., leukemia and bone cancer in workers exposed to radiation)
and injuries. So-called “sick buildings” (in which pathogens grow in air
circulation systems) contribute to health problems among office workers.
Occupational medicine also covers work-related emotional stresses. See
also ASBESTOSIS; INDUSTRIAL MEDICINE.
occupational medicine See INDUSTRIAL MEDICINE
occupational therapy Use of activities to promote health and inde-
pendence, particularly after the acute phase of illness. Such therapy is often
vital for reorienting patients unable to work for long periods. Occupational
therapists assess patients’ abilities, tailor programs to restore physical
function, and devise ways to help those with permanent limitations carry
out everyday functions. See also PHYSICAL MEDICINE AND REHABILITATION.
occupational training See EMPLOYEE TRAINING
oceanic
the existence of an entity, then philosophers and scientists should not
assume the entity’s existence. The history of science provides many
examples of the principle’s application (e.g., the rejection by scientists of
the hypothesis of a luminiferous ether in response to ALBERT EINSTEIN’s Spe-
cial Theory of Relativity). See also MATERIALISM.
Ocoee
Odense
to the SUPEREGO.
Oehlenschläger
ogham
oil-drop experiment See MILLIKAN OIL-DROP EXPERIMENT
husband’s death in 1946. She is regarded by critics as one of the most
original and important American artists, and her works are highly popu-
lar among the general public.
Okefenokee
Olaf V Norwegian in full Olav Alexander Edward Christian
Frederik (b. July 2, 1903, Apple-
ton House, near Sandringham, Nor-
folk, Eng.—d. Jan. 17, 1991, Oslo,
Nor.) King of Norway (1957–91).
Son of King HAAKON VII, Olaf
became a celebrated sportsman, win-
ning the gold medal in yachting at
the 1928 Olympics. In World War II
he lived in exile with his family in
England and was named head of the
Norwegian armed forces in 1944.
From 1955 he served as regent for
his father, whom he succeeded as
king in 1957. Like other constitu-
tional monarchs, Olaf’s duties were
largely ceremonial.
Olajuwon
jaw, a nonprehensile tail (if any), and hard patches of bare skin (ischial
callosities) on the buttocks. Zoologists gather all Old World monkeys into
a single family, Cercopithecidae. There are two subfamilies: Cercopith-
ecinae, or monkeys with cheek pouches (MACAQUES, BABOONS, VERVETS, MAN-
DRILLS, and others); and Colobinae, or leaf monkeys (langurs, COLOBUS
MONKEYS, PROBOSCIS MONKEYS, and others). See also NEW WORLD MONKEY.
Oldenbarnevelt
Olivetti & C. SpA
ING, CANOEING, CYCLING, DIVING, equestrian sports, FENCING, FIELD HOCKEY, FOOT-
BALL (soccer), GYMNASTICS, HANDBALL, JUDO, the modern PENTATHLON, ROWING,
SAILING, SHOOTING, SOFTBALL, SWIMMING, TABLE TENNIS, TENNIS, TRACK AND FIELD (ath-
letics), the TRIATHLON, VOLLEYBALL, WATER POLO, WEIGHTLIFTING, and WRESTLING. The
HOCKEY, LUGEING, SKELETON SLEDDING, SNOWBOARDING, and numerous ice SKAT-
program for the Winter Games includes the BIATHLON, BOBSLEDDING,
Olynthus
deposed by his son, who began a policy of modernization, and under him
Oman joined the ARAB LEAGUE and the UNITED NATIONS. In the First PERSIAN
GULF WAR, Oman cooperated with the forces allied against Iraq. It subse-
quently continued to expand its foreign relations.
Oman, Gulf of Northwestern arm of the Arabian Sea, between the
eastern part of the ARABIAN PENINSULA and Iran. It is about 230 mi (370 km)
wide and 340 mi (545 km) long and connects with the PERSIAN GULF through
the Strait of HORMUZ. It is the only entrance to the Persian Gulf from the
Arabian Sea and Indian Ocean and is important as a shipping route for
the oil-producing area around the Persian Gulf.
Omar, Mosque of See DOME OF THE ROCK
Omar Khayyam
Onega
souls, bodies, or God, claiming that ontology could be a deductive dis-
cipline revealing the essences of things. This view was later strongly
criticized by DAVID HUME and IMMANUEL KANT. Ontology was revived in the
early 20th century by practitioners of PHENOMENOLOGY and EXISTENTIALISM,
notably EDMUND HUSSERL and his student MARTIN HEIDEGGER. In the English-
speaking world, interest in ontology was renewed in the mid-20th century
by W.V.O. QUINE; by the end of the century it had become a central dis-
cipline of ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY. See also IDEALISM; REALISM; UNIVERSAL.
onychophoran
posers such as ALBAN BERG, BENJAMIN BRITTEN, GIAN CARLO MENOTTI, JOHN
ADAMS, and PHILIP GLASS—continued to be produced to critical acclaim.
Opera entered the 21st century as a vibrant and global art form. See also
BALLAD OPERA; OPERETTA.
operon
optical character recognition See OCR
optical scanner See optical SCANNER
optics Science concerned with the production and propagation of light,
the changes it undergoes and produces, and closely related phenomena.
Physical optics deals with the nature and properties of light; geometric
optics deals with the formation of images by mirrors, lenses, and other
devices that use light. Optical data processing involves manipulation of
the information content of an image formed by coherent (one-wavelength)
optical systems. The study of optics has led to the development of devices
such as EYEGLASSES and CONTACT LENSes, TELESCOPEs, MICROSCOPEs, CAMERAs, BIN-
Optimates and Populares
COMPANY; LIN ZEXU.
Oporto See PORTO
Oppenheimer, J(ulius) Rob-
orca See KILLER WHALE
Orcagna
based on INTEGRATION.
Ordovician
PEST MANAGEMENT techniques. Bioengineered strains are avoided. Since
organic farming is time-consuming, organically grown produce tends to
be expensive. Organic produce formerly accounted for a minuscule por-
tion of total American farm output, but it has seen a huge proportional
increase in sales in recent years.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Develop-
ment See Organization for ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
Organization of African Unity (OAU) See AFRICAN UNION
Organization of American States (OAS) International organiza-
tion formed in 1948 to replace the PAN-AMERICAN UNION. It promotes eco-
nomic, military, and cultural cooperation among its members, which
include almost all the independent states of the Western Hemisphere.
(Cuba’s membership was suspended in 1962.) The OAS’s main goals are
to maintain peace in the Western Hemisphere and to prevent intervention in
the region by any outside state. Since the end of the Cold War in the early
1990s, the OAS has more actively encouraged democratic government in
member states, in part by organizing missions to observe and monitor elec-
tions. See also ALLIANCE FOR PROGRESS; INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK.
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries See OPEC
organizational psychology See INDUSTRIAL PSYCHOLOGY
organizational relations See INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
organum
Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument National monument,
southwestern Arizona, U.S., at the Mexican border. It was established in
1937. With an area of 330,689 acres (133,929 hectares), it preserves seg-
ments of the mountainous SONORAN DESERT and is named for the organ-
pipe cactus. Wildlife includes GILA MONSTERs, antelope, coyotes, and a
variety of birds.
organic compound Substance whose MOLECULEs contain one or more
(often many more) CARBON ATOMs (excluding carbonates, cyanides, car-
bides, and a few others; see INORGANIC COMPOUND). Until 1828 (see UREA),
scientists believed that organic compounds could be formed only by life
processes (hence the name). Since carbon has a far greater tendency to
form molecular chains and rings than do other elements, its COMPOUNDs
are vastly more numerous (many millions have been described) than all
others known. Living organisms consist mostly of water and organic com-
pounds: PROTEINs, CARBOHYDRATEs, FATs, NUCLEIC ACIDs, HORMONEs, VITAMINs, and
ALCOHOLs, ALDEHYDEs, KETONEs, PHENOLs, ETHERs, ESTERs, and other, more com-
plex, molecules, including HETEROCYCLIC COMPOUNDs, ISOPRENOIDs, and AMINO
ACIDs.
organic farming or organic gardening System of CROP cultiva-
origami See PAPER FOLDING
Origen
Orléans, house of Name of the cadet or junior branch of the Valois
and BOURBON houses of France. Of the four dynasties of princes, Philippe
I (1336–75) died without an heir. Descendants of the second dynasty,
headed by Louis I (1372–1407), held the title until 1545. The third dynasty
was headed by Gaston (1608–60), whose title from 1626 passed to the
fourth dynasty under Philippe I (1640–1701), younger brother of LOUIS
XIV. Philippe’s descendants
included Louis-Philippe-Joseph, duke
d’ORLÉANS, and LOUIS-PHILIPPE, king of France from 1830 to 1848.
Orléans, Louis-Philippe-Joseph, duke d’ known as Philippe
Égalité (b. April 13, 1747, Saint-Cloud, France—d. Nov. 6, 1793, Paris)
French BOURBON prince who supported popular democracy in the FRENCH
REVOLUTION. A cousin of LOUIS XVI, he disapproved of MARIE-ANTOINETTE and
lived away from the royal court at Versailles. In 1787 he was exiled to
his estates for challenging the king’s authority. In 1789 he was elected to
the ESTATES GENERAL and soon joined the Third Estate. After joining the
JACOBIN CLUB (1791), he renounced his title of nobility (1792) and accepted
the name Philippe Égalité from the Paris Commune. In the NATIONAL CON-
VENTION, he supported the radicals, but, after his son LOUIS-PHILIPPE defected
to the Austrians, he was accused of conspiracy, arrested, and guillotined.
Orlov
pia, numbering more than 20 million, or nearly one-third of the popula-
tion, and occupying much of its central and south-central regions. They
speak a Cushitic language of the AFROASIATIC family. They are a diverse
group, having assimilated and intermarried with other peoples since the
16th century. Traditionally the Oromo were nomadic herders, but today
most are settled agriculturalists. Politically they are largely subjugated to
the dominant AMHARA. In religion they are divided among Islam, the Ethio-
pian Orthodox faith, and traditional beliefs.
Orontes
orthopedics
force the Seminole off their traditional lands in Florida and into the Indian
territory west of the Mississippi River. Osceola and his followers
employed guerrilla tactics and forced a truce. During negotiations he was
arrested and removed to a military fort at Charleston, S.C., where he died.
oscillator Mechanical or electronic device that produces a back-and-
forth PERIODIC MOTION. A PENDULUM is a simple mechanical oscillator that
swings with a constant amplitude, requiring the addition of energy at each
swing only to compensate for the energy lost because of air resistance or
friction. In electronic oscillators, ELECTRONS oscillate with a constant period
and also require the addition of energy to replace energy loss. Electronic
oscillators are used to generate ALTERNATING CURRENT and high-frequency
currents for carrier waves in radio broadcasting. They are incorporated in
a wide variety of electronic equipment.
oscilloscope
Ostend
otitis
TURKS.
Ottonian
(1–2 m), and weight is 6.5–60 lb
(3–26 kg); the large SEA OTTER is an
exception. Otter fur—e.g.,
that of
North American river otters—is
highly valued. Most species live near
rivers,
some live near
lakes or
streams, and the sea otter is com-
pletely marine. Otters eat
small
aquatic animals. They are inquisitive
and playful; a favourite sport is slid-
ing down mud or snow banks.
Otto I known as Otto the Great
INTERNAL-COMBUSTION
Ovett
owlet moth See MILLER
ox Domesticated form of large BOVID (species Bos taurus) that once
moved in herds across North America and Europe (where they have dis-
appeared) and Asia and Africa (where some still exist in the wild). The
docile castrated male is used as a draft animal in many countries. Oxen
are used for food in some areas. The term is also applied to a castrated
male of any CATTLE breed. See also AUROCHS, YAK.
oxalic
agents include FLUORINE, OZONE, and oxygen itself; strong reducing agents
include ALKALI METALs such as SODIUM and LITHIUM.
all rock types, whether IGNEOUS, SEDIMENTAR Y, or METAMORPHIC.
Oxus River See AMU DAR YA
other molecules and FUNCTIONAL GROUPs, including NITRATE, SULFATE, PHOSPHATE,
and CARBONATE; ALCOHOLs, ALDEHYDEs, CARBOXYLIC ACIDs, and KETONEs; and PER-
Oxyrhynchus
living things. CHLOROFLUOROCARBONS, or CFCs, and some other air pollut-
ants that diffuse into the ozone layer destroy ozone. In the mid-1980s,
scientists discovered that a “hole”—an area where the ozone is up to 50%
thinner than normal—develops periodically in the ozone layer above Ant-
arctica. This severe regional depletion, explained as a natural seasonal
depletion, appears to have been exacerbated by the effects of CFCs, and
may have led to an increase in SKIN CANCER caused by UV exposure.
Restrictions on the manufacture and use of CFCs and other ozone-
destroying pollutants were imposed in 1978.
Paasikivi
and pagodas cover a wide area. An earthquake in 1975 severely damaged
more than half of the important structures and irreparably destroyed many
of them. The village also has a school for lacquerware, for which the
region is noted.
Paganini
Päijänne
(e.g., MURAL, easel, panel, MINIATURE, ILLUMINATED MANUSCRIPT, SCROLL, screen,
Paisiello
Pala bronze See EASTERN INDIAN BRONZE
palace Royal residence, and sometimes a seat of government or a reli-
gious centre. The word derives from Rome’s Palatine Hill, where the
emperors built their residences. The earliest known palaces are those of
the Egyptian kings at Thebes, with an outer wall enclosing a labyrinth of
rooms and courtyards. Other ancient cultures also built vast palaces (e.g.,
the Assyrian palaces at NimrHd, Khorsabad, and Nineveh; the Minoan
palace at Knossos; and the Persian palaces at Persepolis and Susa). In
Rome and Constantinople, palaces reached their peak as centres of power.
In Western Europe after the Middle Ages, palaces tended to be single
buildings. In Renaissance Italy every prince had his royal palace, usually
with an internal court surrounded by an arcade. The court of the Pitti Pal-
ace in Florence (1560) is an important example of Mannerist architecture.
French palaces include the LOUVRE and VERSAILLES; Spanish palaces include
EL ESCORIAL and the ALHAMBRA. In contrast to the typical Western format,
East Asian palaces, such as the imperial palaces of Japan and those in
Beijing’s FORBIDDEN CITY, consist of many buildings (in these cases, low
pavilions mostly of highly decorated wood construction) within vast
walled gardens.
Palacký
nant during the Cretaceous had disappeared, and the epoch saw the rapid
proliferation and evolution of mammals.
extended climatic conditions of past geologic ages. Paleoclimatologists
seek to explain climate variations for all parts of the Earth during any
given geologic period, beginning with the time of the Earth’s formation.
The basic research data are drawn mainly from geology and paleobotany;
speculative attempts at explanation have come largely from astronomy,
atmospheric physics, meteorology, and geophysics.
paleogeography or palaeogeography Geography of selected
Paleolithic
EDWARD R. MURROW.
Palma, Arturo Alessandri See Arturo ALESSANDRI PALMA
Palmas, Las See LAS PALMAS
Palme
m) in elevation, as well as many glaciers. Its highest point, IMENI ISMAIL
SAMANI (Communism) Peak, rises in the northwestern part of the range to
an elevation of 24,590 ft (7,495 m). The region is sparsely populated, and
almost all the inhabitants are Tajiks. It is a central mountain knot from
which extend several great ranges, including the KARAKORAMs and HINDU
KUSH.
Pamlico
Pan-Slavism Movement to unite Slav peoples of eastern and central
Europe. It began in the early 19th century when Slav intellectuals stud-
ied their common cultures. Political goals for Slavic unity increased in
1848, when a Slav congress organized by FRANTIŠEK PALACKý met in Prague
to press for equal rights under Austrian rule. In the 1860s the movement
became popular in Russia, to which Pan-Slavs looked for protection from
Turkish and Austro-Hungarian rule; this led Russia and Serbia into wars
against the Ottoman Empire in 1876–77. In the 20th century, nationalist
rivalries among the Slav peoples prevented their effective collaboration.
Pan-Turkism Political movement of the late 19th and early 20th cen-
turies, which had as its goal the political union of all Turkic-speaking
peoples in the OTTOMAN EMPIRE, Russia, China, Iran, and Afghanistan. The
movement, which began among the Turks in the Crimea and on the Volga,
initially sought to unite the Turks of the Ottoman and Russian empires
against growing Russian domination. MUSTAFA KEMAL ATATÜRK, the father of
the Republic of Turkey, later de-emphasized Pan-Turkism, encouraging
Turkish nationalism only within Turkey. See also Ismail GASPRINSKI; ENVER
PASHA; YOUNG TURKS.
Panaji
anteed representation in proportion to their population. Today the role and
success of the panchayats are still the topic of heated discussion. See also
INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS.
Panchen Lama
women’s-suffrage bill and the Married Women’s Property Acts (1870,
1882). In 1889 she founded the Women’s Franchise League, which in
1894 secured for married women the right to vote in local elections. In
1903, after holding municipal offices in Manchester, she founded the
Women’s Social and Political Union (WSPU). From 1912 she advocated
extreme militancy, mainly in the form of arson, and was arrested 12 times
in one year. Weeks before her death in 1928, Britain passed a bill to give
voting rights to all women. Her daughter Christabel H. Pankhurst (1880–
1958)—later Dame Christabel—organized the militant
tactics of the
WSPU and directed actions that included hunger strikes and huge out-
door rallies. She later became a religious evangelist and moved to the U.S.
Pannini
Paoli
papillomavirus
VON HINDENBURG to
MACHINE; KRAFT PROCESS.
Papuan
Paraguay
Paramaribo
Paris Commune or Commune of Paris (March 18–May 28, 1871)
Paris-Match
Parks, Rosa orig. Rosa Louise McCauley (b. Feb. 4, 1913, Tuske-
gee, Ala., U.S.—d. Oct. 24, 2005, Detroit, Mich.) U.S. civil rights activ-
ist. She worked as a seamstress in Montgomery, Ala., where she joined
the NAACP in 1943. In 1955 she was arrested after refusing to give her
seat on a public bus to a white man. The resultant boycott of the city’s
bus system, organized by MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR., and others, brought the
CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT to new prominence. In 1957 Parks moved to Detroit,
where she was a staff assistant (1965–88) to U.S. Rep. John Conyers. She
was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in 1999.
Parlement
Parker, Dorothy orig. Dorothy
Parkinson, C(yril) Northcote
parliamentary procedure or rules of order Generally accepted
Parmenides
Parshvanatha
tions from a Highway Railing at Barstow, California (1941), US High-
ball (1943), and And on the Seventh Day Petals Fell on Petaluma (1966).
parterre
prepregnancy state. See also CESAREAN SECTION; LACTATION; MIDWIFER Y; MISCAR-
RIAGE; NATURAL CHILDBIRTH; OBSTETRICS AND GYNECOLOGY; PREMATURE BIRTH.
Party of God See HEZBOLLAH
Parvati
Pashtun
Pasternak, Boris (Leonidovich) (b. Feb. 10, 1890, Moscow,
Pasteur
ines attacked SIMONY and clerical concubinage and marriage and opposed
the clergy’s moral corruption. They also encouraged greater participation
by the laity in religious life and drew support from the Gregorian Reform
popes, including Alexander II and GREGOR Y VII. The Patarines formed part
of the broader movement for church reform in the 11th century, and the
resignation of their rival, the archbishop of Milan, led to a schism in the
city that would help bring about the INVESTITURE CONTROVERSY. In the later
12th century, the name Patarine was used as a general label for all her-
etics, particularly the CATHARI.
patch test Controlled application of biological or chemical substances
to the skin to test for ALLERGY. Small amounts of diluted test substances
applied under a patch of cloth or soft paper and an impermeable mem-
brane are left in place for 48 hours, and the skin reaction is then exam-
ined and scored from 0 (none) to 4+ (severe blistering and redness).
Patel
Patna
Paulus
Paul VI orig. Giovanni Battista Montini (b. Sept. 26, 1897, Con-
PAULI EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE.
Pavese
Pazzi conspiracy
1462 I
Peacock (cid:2) Pearson
Pear (Pyrus communis)
GRANT HEILMAN
COURTESY OF THE AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL
HISTORY, NEW YORK
Blister pearl attached to the shell of an
Oriental pearl oyster (Pinctada marten-
sii Dunker)
pearlstone See PERLITE
viewed was NIKITA KHRUSHCHEV. See MUCKRAKER.
Pearson, Lester B(owles) (b. April 23, 1897, Toronto, Ont.,
Can.—d. Dec. 27, 1972, Ottawa, Ont.) Prime minister of Canada (1963–
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
peat moss or sphagnum moss
Peary, Harold orig. Harrold Jese Pereira de Faria (b. July 25,
economic regimens. See also EJIDO; FEUDALISM; HACIENDA; SERFDOM.
Peasants’ Revolt or Wat Tyler’s Rebellion (1381) First great
DR YCH ZWINGLI and THOMAS MÜNTZER, its condemnation by MARTIN LUTHER
Peckinpah
Pegasus
Penang
DULUM).
peneplain
Penobscot
Penutian languages
diet were blamed until Helicobacter pylori bacteria and long-term use of
ASPIRIN and similar drugs were shown to be the two major causes. The
former is treated with combination drug therapy and the latter by stop-
ping the causative drugs if possible or with drugs that reduce acid pro-
duction. A rare cause is Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, in which a tumour
causes increased acid secretion. Cigarette smoking slows healing and pro-
motes recurrence.
peptide Organic compound composed of a series of AMINO ACIDs linked
by peptide bonds (see COVALENT BOND) between a carbon atom of one and
a nitrogen atom of the next. Peptide chains longer than a few dozen amino
acids are called PROTEINs. Biosynthesis of peptides from a succession of
amino acids carried by transfer RNA molecules takes place on RIBOSOMEs
and is catalyzed and controlled by ENZYMEs. Many HORMONEs, ANTIBIOTICs,
and other compounds that participate in life processes are peptides.
Pepys
peregrine falcon
activities, including happenings, body art, actions, events, and non-matrix
theatre. Prominent performance artists have included JOSEPH BEUYS, JOHN
CAGE, Dennis Oppenheim, Yoko Ono, NAM JUNE PAIK, MEREDITH MONK, and
LAURIE ANDERSON.
Pergamum
periodontitis
permutations and combinations Number of ways a subset of
Pernambuco See RECIFE
Perón
Perrault
GULF WAR.
Persian language or Farsi language IRANIAN LANGUAGE spoken by
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Persia (cid:2) personalismo
Persian Wars or Greco-Persian Wars (492–449 BC) Series of
American persimmon (Diospyros vir-
giniana).
H.R. HUNGERFORD
Perski, Shimon See SHIMON PERES
personal computer (PC) MICROCOMPUTER designed for use by one
person at a time. A typical PC assemblage comprises a CPU; internal
MEMOR Y consisting of RAM and ROM; data storage devices (including a
HARD DISC, a FLOPPY DISC, orCD-ROM); and input/output devices (including
a display screen, keyboard, MOUSE, and PRINTER). The PC industry began in
1977 when APPLE COMPUTER introduced the Apple II. Radio Shack and
Commodore Business Machines also introduced PCs that year.
entered the PC market in 1981. The IBM PC, with increased memory
capacity and backed by IBM’s large sales organization, quickly became
the industry standard. Apple’s Macintosh (1984) was particularly useful
for DESKTOP PUBLISHING. MICROSOFT CORP. introduced MS WINDOWS (1985), a
personal property See REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY
1478 I personality (cid:2) Peru
experience. See also PERSONALITY DISORDER; PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING.
personnel administration See INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
Perspex See LUCITE
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Perth City (pop., 1995 est.: 42,000), central Scotland. Located on the
River TAY, northwest of EDINBURGH, Perth was a Roman settlement; it
became a royal burgh in 1210. It was the capital of Scotland until 1437,
when King JAMES I of Scotland was murdered there. At the Church of St.
John the Baptist in 1559, JOHN KNOX denounced idolatry; the result was
the plunder of Perth’s monasteries and altars. It was a JACOBITE city dur-
ing the Scottish uprisings of 1715 and 1745. The economy is based on
whisky blending and distilling and on manufacturing. It is also an agri-
cultural market centre.
pertussis See WHOOPING COUGH
nearly one-third are MESTIZOs, and most of
the remainder are Aymara Indians and
people of European ancestry. Languages:
Spanish, Quechua, Aymara (all official).
Religion: Christianity
(predominantly
Roman Catholic [official]; also Protestant). Currency: new sol. Peru is the
third largest country in South America and may be divided into three geo-
graphic regions from west to east: the coast, which consists of a long,
narrow belt of desert lowlands; the Sierra (highlands), which is the Peru-
vian portion of the ANDES MOUNTAINS; and the Montaña, the vast, forested
eastern foothills and plains, consisting mainly of the tropical rainforests
of the AMAZON RIVER basin. Peru has a developing mixed economy based
largely on services, manufacturing, agriculture, and mining. Most indus-
tries, including the petroleum industry, were nationalized in the late 1960s
and early ’70s, but many were privatized again in the 1990s. Peru is a
republic with one legislative house; its head of state and government is
the president. Peru was the centre of the INCA empire, whose capital,
CUZCO, was established in the 12th century. In 1533 the region was con-
quered by Spanish adventurer FRANCISCO PIZARRO and thereafter was domi-
nated by Spain for almost 300 years as the Viceroyalty of PERU. It declared
its independence in 1821, and freedom was achieved in 1824. Peru was
defeated by Chile in the War of the PACIFIC (1879–83). In 1941 a bound-
ary dispute with Ecuador erupted into war, which gave Peru control over
a larger part of the Amazon basin; further disputes ensued until the bor-
der was demarcated again in 1998. The government was overthrown by
a military junta in 1968; civilian rule was restored in 1980. The govern-
ment of ALBERTO FUJIMORI dissolved the legislature in 1992 and promulgated
a new constitution the following year. The government later successfully
combated the SHINING PATH and TUPAC AMARÚ rebel movements. Fujimori
won a second term in 1995, but charges of fraud accompanied his elec-
Perugia
Some inadvertently affect other organisms in the environment, either
directly by their toxic effects or via elimination of the target organism.
pet Any animal kept by humans for companionship or pleasure rather
than for utility. The main distinction between pets and domesticated live-
stock is the degree of contact between owner and animal. Another dis-
tinction is the owner’s affection for the animal, which is often returned.
Dogs are known to have been kept as pets since prehistoric times; cats,
since the 16th century BC; and horses, since at least 2000 BC. Other com-
mon pets include birds, rabbits, rodents, raccoons, reptiles, amphibians,
and even insects. The trend toward making pets of exotic animals (e.g.,
monkeys and ocelots) is worrisome because owners can rarely provide
for their needs, and the animals’ already precarious populations are fur-
ther depleted when members are sold for pets.
PET See POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY
Pétain
Petipa
Peter the Cruel See PETER IV
Petition of Right (1628) Petition sent by Parliament to King CHARLES I
complaining of a series of breaches of law. The petition sought recognition
of four principles: no taxation without the consent of Parliament, no impris-
onment without cause, no quartering of soldiers on subjects, and no martial
law in peacetime. To continue receiving subsidies for his policies, Charles
was compelled to accept the petition, but he later ignored its principles.
Pet¤fi
petrol See GASOLINE
Petróleos de Venezuela
peyotism See NATIVE AMERICAN CHURCH
ELECTROCHEMISTR Y).
Phaedra
and purity. See also DRUG POISONING; PHARMACY; PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTR Y.
pharmacy Science dealing with collection, preparation, and standard-
ization of DRUGs. Pharmacists, who must earn a qualifying degree, prepare
and dispense prescribed medications. They formerly mixed and measured
drug products from raw materials according to doctors’ prescriptions, and
they are still responsible for formulating, storing, and providing correct
dosages of medicines, now usually produced by pharmaceutical compa-
nies as premeasured tablets or capsules. They also advise patients on the
use of both prescription and over-the-counter drugs. Laws regulating the
pharmaceutical industry are based on the national pharmacopoeia, which
outlines the purity and dosages of numerous medicinal products.
Pharsalus
phenylalanine out of the diet (by total avoidance of meat, dairy, and high-
protein foods and ASPARTAME) until adolescence permits normal develop-
ment. Protein is supplied in a phenylalanine-free formula. Pregnant
women with PKU must resume the diet to prevent severe damage to the
unborn child.
pheromone
Philip II French Philippe known as Philip the Bold (b. Jan. 17,
1342, Pontoise, France—d. April 27, 1404, Halle, Brabant) Duke of Bur-
gundy (1363–1404). He was granted the duchy of Burgundy by his father,
JOHN II, and by marriage and purchase he acquired additional lands in
northern and central France, Flanders, and the Netherlands. He shared the
government with his brothers during the minority of his nephew CHARLES
VI, ensuring friendly relations with England and Germany. When Charles
went insane (1392), Philip became virtual ruler of France. He formed an
alliance with England (1396) and withdrew his support of the AVIGNON
PAPACY (1398).
Philip II French Philippe known as Philip Augustus (b. Aug. 21,
Philip II Spanish Felipe
(1346) caused crises in France until the spread of the BLACK DEATH (from
1348) overshadowed other considerations.
Philip, duke of Edinburgh known as Prince Philip (b. June 10,
1921, Corfu, Greece) Husband of Queen ELIZABETH II of Britain. Son of
Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark (1882–1944) and Princess Alice
(1885–1969), a great-granddaughter of Queen VICTORIA, he was reared in
Britain. In World War II he served in combat with the Royal Navy. In
1947 he became a British subject, taking his mother’s surname, Mount-
batten, and renouncing his right to the Greek and Danish thrones. He
married Princess Elizabeth in 1947 and continued on active service in the
navy until her accession to the throne in 1952. CHARLES, PRINCE OF WALES,
is their son.
Philip, King See METACOM
Philip Augustus See PHILIP II (France)
Philip Morris tobacco companies Two of the world’s largest
Philip of Macedonia See PHILIP II
Philip of Valois See PHILIP VI (France)
Philip the Bold See PHILIP II (Burgundy)
Philip the Fair See PHILIP IV (France)
Philip the Good See PHILIP III (Burgundy)
Philipon
Philo Judaeus
Philips Electronics NV in full Royal Philips Electronics NV
Dutch Koninklijke Philips Electronics NV Major Dutch manufac-
Phillips, Wendell (b. Nov. 29,
philosophers such as THOMAS AQUINAS, GEORGE BERKELEY, and SØREN KIERKEG-
AARD regarded philosophy as a means of defending religion and dispelling
the antireligious errors of MATERIALISM and RATIONALISM. PYTHAGORAS, RENÉ
SOCRATICS, FRANCIS BACON, and ALFRED NORTH WHITEHEAD, among many oth-
METAPHYSICS, philosophy of MIND, and PHILOSOPHICAL ANTHROPOLOGY. See also
ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY; CONTINENTAL PHILOSOPHY; FEMINIST PHILOSOPHY; philosophy
of SCIENCE.
phlebitis
phonics
Photius
range from about 18,000 °F (10,000
°C) at the bottom to 8,000 °F (4,000
°C) at the top; its density is about
1/1,000 that of air at the surface of
Earth. SUNSPOTs are photospheric
phenomena. The photosphere has a
granular structure. Each grain (cell),
a mass of hot gas several hundred
miles in diameter, rises from inside
the Sun, radiates energy, and sinks
back within minutes to be replaced
by others in a constantly changing
pattern.
photosynthesis
Process
which green plants and certain other
organisms
transform light
chemical energy. In green plants,
light energy is captured by CHLORO-
PHYLL in the CHLOROPLASTS of the leaves
and used to convert water, carbon
dioxide, and minerals into oxygen
and energy-rich organic compounds
(simple and complex sugars) that are
the basis of both plant and animal
life. Photosynthesis consists of a
number of photochemical and enzy-
matic reactions. It occurs in two
stages. During the light-dependent
stage (light reaction), chlorophyll
absorbs light energy, which excites
some electrons in the pigment mol-
ecules to higher energy levels; these
leave the chlorophyll and pass along
a series of molecules, generating for-
mation of NADPH (an enzyme) and
high-energy ATP molecules. Oxy-
gen, released as a by-product, passes
into the atmosphere through pores in
the leaves. NADPH and ATP drive
the second stage, the dark reaction
(or Calvin cycle, discovered by
MELVIN CALVIN), which does not require light. During this stage glucose is
generated using atmospheric carbon dioxide. Photosynthesis is crucial for
maintaining life on Earth; if it ceased, there would soon be little food or
other organic matter on the planet, and most types of organisms would
disappear.
phototube See PHOTOCELL
photovoltaic effect Process in which two dissimilar materials in close
contact act as an electric cell when struck by light or other radiant energy.
In CR YSTALS of certain elements, such as SILICON and GERMANIUM, the ELECTRONS
are usually not free to move from atom to atom. Light striking the crys-
tal provides the energy needed to free electrons from their bound condi-
tion. These electrons can cross the junction between two dissimilar
crystals more easily in one direction than another, so one side of the junc-
tion acquires a negative voltage with respect to the other. As long as light
falls on the two materials, the photovoltaic BATTER Y can continue to pro-
vide voltage and current. The current can be used to measure the bright-
ness of the light or as a source of power, as in a SOLAR CELL.
Phrachomklao See MONGKUT
Phrachunlachomklao See CHULALONGKORN
Phramongkutklao See VAJIRAVUDH
phratry
phrenology
physics, philosophy of Philosophical investigation of the concepts,
problems, and methods of PHYSICS and related sciences. The philosophy of
physics traditionally has been concerned with clarifying the logical struc-
ture, ontological commitments, and intertheoretic relations of fundamen-
tal physical theories, including RELATIVITY, QUANTUM MECHANICS, and STATISTICAL
CIPLE; UNIFIED FIELD THEOR Y.
VATION, EMOTION, LEARNING, MEMOR Y, COGNITION, or MENTAL DISORDERs. Also con-
sidered are other physical factors that affect the nervous system, including
heredity, metabolism, hormones, disease, drug ingestion, and diet. An
experimental science, physiological psychology relies heavily on labora-
tory research and quantitative data.
physiology
Piazzolla
the last campaign of the THIRTY YEARS’ WAR. He represented Austria at the
Congress of Nürnberg (1649), which negotiated issues left unsettled by
the Peace of WESTPHALIA.
picker Machine for harvesting a crop (e.g., corn, cotton) and preparing
it for storage. The mechanical picker removes mainly the desired portion
of the plant (e.g., grain and cobs of corn, bolls of cotton) rather than har-
vesting the entire plant.
pickerel Any of several North American PIKES (family Esocidae), dis-
tinguished from the northern pike and MUSKELLUNGE by their smaller size,
completely scaled cheeks and gill covers, and banded or chainlike mark-
ings. The chain pickerel (Esox niger) grows to about 2 ft (0.6 m) and a
weight of about 3 lbs (1.4 kg). The barred (E. americanus) and grass (E.
vermiculatus) pickerels reach a maximum weight of about 1 lb (0.5 kg).
Pickering, Timothy (b. July 17, 1745, Salem, Mass.—d. Jan. 29,
1829, Salem, Mass., U.S.) U.S. politician. He joined the militia in 1766
and served in the AMERICAN REVOLUTION under GEORGE WASHINGTON, becom-
ing adjutant general (1777–78) and quartermaster general (1780–85). He
later served as U.S. postmaster general (1791–95), secretary of war
(1795), and secretary of state (1795–1800). He served in the U.S. Senate
from 1803 to 1811 and in the House of Representatives from 1813 to 1817.
A leader of the FEDERALIST PARTY, he was a member of the ESSEX JUNTO, and
he opposed the WAR OF 1812. After retiring from politics, he turned to
experimental farming and education.
picketing Act by workers of standing in front of or near a workplace
to call attention to their grievances, discourage patronage, and, during
STRIKES, to discourage strikebreakers. Picketing is also used in non-work-
related protests. The U.S. Norris-LaGuardia Act (1932) made it easier for
workers to picket by restricting the use of court injunctions against strikes,
but the TAFT-HARTLEY ACT (1947) outlawed mass picketing.
Pickett, George E(dward) (b. Jan. 25, 1825, Richmond, Va.,
U.S.—d. July 30, 1875, Norfolk, Va.) U.S. and Confederate army officer.
He graduated from West Point and served in the MEXICAN WAR. In 1861
he resigned his commission to enter the Confederate army. He rose to
major general and commanded a division at the Battle of Fredericksburg.
At the Battle of GETTYSBURG, he led the climactic attack known as Pickett’s
Charge, in which 4,300 men of his division constituted almost half the
attacking force under JAMES LONGSTREET. The attempt to breach the Union
lines on Cemetery Ridge was repulsed with the loss of about 60% of his
men. Though criticized for his leadership, he retained his command.
Pickford, Mary orig. Gladys Mary Smith (b. April 9, 1893, Tor-
Pico Bolívar See BOLÍVAR PEAK
Pico della Mirandola
infamous convict, Alexander Pierce (Jimmy the Pieman), who was recap-
tured at its mouth after escaping from the MACQUARIE HARBOUR penal colony.
pier In building construction, a vertical load-bearing member such as an
intermediate support for adjacent ends of two BAYS or spans. Bulkier than
a column but smaller than a wall, a pier can support an arch or beam. The
lower portion of a pier may be widened to better distribute the downward
pressure of a massive overlying structure. In Romanesque and Gothic
architecture, a feature of the NAVE arcade is the compound pier, which is
cross-shaped in cross section, with shafts placed in the recesses.
Pierce, Franklin (b. Nov. 23, 1804, Hillsboro, N.H., U.S.—d. Oct. 8,
1869, Concord, N.H.) 14th president
of the U.S. (1853–57). He served in
the U.S. House of Representatives
from 1833 to 1837 and in the Senate
from 1837 to 1842. At
the dead-
locked Democratic Party convention
of 1852, he was nominated as a com-
promise
presidential
candidate;
though largely unknown nationally,
he unexpectedly trounced WINFIELD
SCOTT in the general election. For the
sake of harmony and business pros-
perity, he was inclined to oppose
antislavery agitation. His promotion
of U.S. territorial expansion resulted
in the diplomatic controversy of the
OSTEND MANIFESTO. He reorganized
the diplomatic and consular service
and created the U.S. Court of
Claims. Pierce encouraged plans for
a transcontinental railroad and approved the GADSDEN PURCHASE. To pro-
mote northwestern migration and conciliate sectional demands, he
approved the KANSAS-NEBRASKA ACT but was unable to settle the resultant
problems. Defeated for renomination by JAMES BUCHANAN in 1856, he
retired from politics.
Piero della Francesca
various iron and STEEL products (see BESSEMER PROCESS, FINER Y PROCESS, PUD-
DLING PROCESS).
Pigalle
Pilon
GRAN CHACO of Paraguay to join the Paraguay River opposite ASUNCIÓN,
after about 1,000 mi (1,600 km). It forms part of the border between
Argentina and Paraguay.
pile In building construction, a postlike foundation member used from
prehistoric times. Piles transfer building loads down to a suitable bearing
stratum when the soil mass immediately below a construction is unsuitable
for the direct bearing of footings (see FOUNDATION). Piles support loads
either by bearing directly on rock or suitable soil or by developing friction
along their very ample length. In modern civil engineering, piles of timber,
steel, or concrete are driven into the ground to support a structure; bridge
piers and building foundations may be supported on groups of piles.
pile See HEMORRHOID
MAYFLOWER COMPACT; PLYMOUTH CO.
pill bug Any species of terrestrial CRUSTACEAN in the genera Armadilli-
dium and Armadillo (both in the
order Isopoda), native to Europe and
introduced worldwide. Pill bugs
(sometimes
called wood
lice)
resemble tiny armadillos in appear-
ance and behaviour;
they have a
gray, oval body covered with plate-
like armour and, when disturbed, roll
into a ball. They are about 0.75 in.
(19 mm) long. Pill bugs live in dry,
sunny places, in dry leaf litter, and on
forest edges. See also SOW BUG.
pillar Relatively slender isolated
vertical structural member such as a
PIER or (usually squat) column. It may
be constructed of a single piece of
stone or wood or built up of units,
such as bricks. A pillar commonly
has a load-bearing or stabilizing
function, but it may also stand alone,
as do commemorative pillars.
Pillars of Hercules Two prom-
ontories at the eastern end of the Strait of GIBRALTAR. They include the Rock
of Gibraltar (at GIBRALTAR) in Europe and Jebel Musa (at CEUTA) in north-
Pinatubo
Pinero
Piombo, Sebastiano del See SEBASTIANO DEL PIOMBO
Pirquet
pitot tube
pit bull terrier or Staffordshire terrier Dog breed developed in
HEAD, FER-DE-LANCE, MOCCASIN, RATTLESNAKE.
VAL; TUNING AND TEMPERAMENT.
with repressive measures. In 1800 he secured the Act of UNION with Ire-
land but resigned in 1801 when his proposal for Catholic emancipation
was denied. His second term as premier (1804–06) was marked by the
collapse of the Third Coalition after the Battles of ULM and AUSTERLITZ, the
news of which weakened his already fragile health.
pittosporum
PKK See KURDISTAN WORKERS PARTY
PKU See PHENYLKETONURIA
PL Kyodan
toward the tail. Most species are 0.1–0.6 in. (3–15 mm) long; some grow to
about 1 ft (30 cm). Planarians swim with an undulating motion or creep like
slugs. Most feed at night on protozoans, snails, and other worms.
Planck
Plantagenet
Plata, Viceroyalty of the Río de la See Viceroyalty of the RÍO DE
LA PLATA
Plataea
and take part in the conversion sequence of coagulation factors. They also
store and transport several chemicals.
Plateresque
Plautus
Pleven
KILLDEER.
WATER POLLUTION, WATER-SUPPLY SYSTEM. See illustration opposite.
Plutarch
TRANSITION ELEMENTs, it is the most important TRANSURANIUM ELEMENT because of
PMS See PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME
pneumatic device
Pocahontas
pogy See MENHADEN
Poincaré
Poitier
Polanski
poliomyelitis
political convention or party conference In politics, a meeting
LOCKE, and JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU in the exposition of a SOCIAL-CONTRACT
theory. This was rejected by DAVID HUME and also by G.W.F. HEGEL, whose
Philosophy of Right (1821) was fundamental for 19th-century political
thought. Hegel’s defense of private property stimulated KARL MAR X’s cri-
tique of it. JOHN STUART MILL developed JEREMY BENTHAM’s utilitarian theory
of law and political institutions, so as to reconcile them with individual
liberty. In the 20th century JOHN DEWEY sought to counteract the dehu-
manizing aspects of modern capitalist society through a freer form of
pollack or pollock
Pollaiuolo
warrior’s triumphal dance and had been adopted by the Polish court as a
formal march as early as 1573. The dancers promenaded with gliding steps
accented by bending the knee slightly on every third step. It often
appeared in ballets, and it was used as a musical form by composers such
as GEORGE FRIDERIC HANDEL, LUDWIG VAN BEETHOVEN, and especially FRÉDÉRIC
CHOPIN, whose piano polonaises were martial and heroic.
Poltava
include many PLASTICS, including POLYETHYLENE, the NYLONs, POLYURETHANEs,
POLYESTERs, vinyls (e.g., PVC), and synthetic RUBBERS. The SILICONE polymers,
with an inorganic backbone of silicon and oxygen atoms and organic side
groups, are among the most important mixed organic-inorganic com-
pounds.
polymerase
Pombal
Pompey
Pontormo
Popes and Antipopes1 (antipopes in italics) 
Peter
Linus
Anacletus
Clement I
Evaristus
Alexander I
Sixtus I
Telesphorus
Hyginus
Pius I
Anicetus
Soter
Eleutherius
Victor I
Zephyrinus
Calixtus I (Callistus)
Hippolytus
Urban I
Pontian
Anterus
Fabian
Cornelius
Novatian
Lucius I
Stephen I
Sixtus II
Dionysius
Felix I
Eutychian
Gaius
Marcellinus
Marcellus I
Eusebius
Miltiades (Melchiades)
Sylvester I
Julius I
Liberius
Felix (II)
Damasus I
Ursinus
Siricius
Anastasius I
Innocent I
Zosimus
Boniface I
Eulalius
Celestine I
Sixtus III
Leo I
Hilary
Simplicius
Felix III (or II)2
Gelasius I
Anastasius II
Symmachus
Laurentius
Hormisdas
John I
Felix IV (or III)2
Dioscorus
Boniface II
John II
Agapetus I
Silverius
Vigilius
Pelagius I
John III
Benedict I
Pelagius II
Gregory I
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
?–c.64
c.67–76/79
76–88 or
79–91
88–97 or
92–101
c.97–c.107
105–115 or
109–119
c.115–c.125
c.125–c.136
c.136–c.140
c.140–55
c.155–c.166
c.166–c.175
c.175–89
c.189–99
c.199–217
217?–22
217, 18–235
222–30
230–35
235–36
236–50
251–53
253–54
254–57
257–58
259–68
269–74
275–83
283–96
291/96–304
308–9
309/10
311–14
314–35
337–52
352–66
355–58
366–84
366–67
384–99
399–401
401–17
417–18
418–22
418–19
422–32
432–40
440–61
461–68
468–83
483–92
492–96
496–98
498–514
498, 501–c.
505/507
514–23
523–26
526–30
530–32
533–35
535–36
536–37
537–55
556–61
561–74
575–79
579–90
590–604
Sabinian
Boniface III
Boniface IV
Deusdedit (also called
Adeodatus I)
Boniface V
Honorius I
Severinus
John IV
Theodore I
Martin I
Eugenius I
Vitalian
Adeodatus II
Donus
Agatho
Leo II
Benedict II
John V
Conon
Sergius I
Theodore
Paschal
John VI
John VII
Sisinnius
Constantine
Gregory II
Gregory III
Zacharias (Zachary)
Stephen (II)3
Stephen II (or III) 3
Paul I
Constantine (II)
Philip
Stephen III (or IV) 3
Adrian I
Leo III
Stephen IV (or V) 3
Paschal I
Eugenius II
Valentine
Gregory IV
Sergius II
Leo IV
Benedict III
Anastasius (the Librarian)
Nicholas I
Adrian II
John VIII
Marinus I
Adrian III
Stephen V (or VI) 3
Formosus
Boniface VI
Stephen VI (or VII) 3
Romanus
Theodore II
John IX
Benedict IV
Leo V
Christopher
Sergius III
Anastasius III
Lando
John X
Leo VI
Stephen VII (or VIII) 3
John XI
Leo VII
Stephen VIII (or IX) 3
Marinus II
Agapetus II
John XII
604–6
608–15
615–18
619–25
625–38
640–42
642–49
649–55
654–57
657–72
672–76
676–78
678–81
682–83
684–85
685–86
686–87
687–701
701–5
705–7
708–15
715–31
731–41
741–52
752–57
757–67
767–68
768–72
772–95
795–816
816–17
817–24
824–27
827–44
844–47
847–55
855–58
858–67
867–72
872–82
882–84
884–85
885–91
891–96
898–900
900–903
903–4
904–11
911–13
913–14
914–28
929–31
931–35
936–39
939–42
942–46
946–55
955–64
Leo VIII4
Benedict V4
John XIII
Benedict VI
Boniface VII (1st time)
Benedict VII
John XIV
Boniface VII (2nd time)
John XV (or XVI)5
Gregory V
John XVI (or XVII) 5
Sylvester II
John XVII (or XVIII) 5
John XVIII (or XIX) 5
Sergius IV
Gregory (VI)
Benedict VIII
John XIX (or XX) 5
Benedict IX (1st time)
Sylvester III
Benedict IX (2nd time)
Gregory VI
Clement II
Benedict IX (3rd time)
Damasus II
Leo IX
Victor II
Stephen IX (or X) 3
Benedict X
Nicholas II
Alexander II
Honorius (II)
Gregory VII
Clement (III)
Victor III
Urban II
Paschal II
Theodoric
Albert (Aleric)
Sylvester (IV)
Gelasius II
Gregory (VIII)
Calixtus II (Callistus)
Honorius II
Celestine (II)
Innocent II
Anacletus (II)
Victor (IV)
Celestine II
Lucius II
Eugenius III
Anastasius IV
Adrian IV
Alexander III
Victor (IV)
Paschal (III)
Calixtus (III)
Innocent (III)
Lucius III
Urban III
Gregory VIII
Clement III
Celestine III
Innocent III
Honorius III
Gregory IX
Celestine IV
Innocent IV
Alexander IV
Urban IV
Clement IV
Gregory X
Innocent V
Adrian V
John XXI5
963–65
964–66?
965–72
973–74
974–83
983–84
984–85
985–96
996–99
997–98
999–1003
1004–9
1009–12
1012–24
1024–32
1032–44
1045–46
1046–47
1047–48
1049–54
1055–57
1057–58
1058–59
1059–61
1061–73
1061–72
1073–85
1080–1100
1086–87
1088–99
1099–1118
1100–2
1105–11
1118–19
1118–21
1119–24
1124–30
1130–43
1130–38
1143–44
1144–45
1145–53
1153–54
1154–59
1159–81
1159–64
1164–68
1168–78
1179–80
1181–85
1185–87
1187–91
1191–98
1198–1216
1216–27
1227–41
1243–54
1254–61
1261–64
1265–68
1271–76
1276–77
1277–80
1281–85
1285–87
1288–92
1294–1303
1303–4
1305–14
1316–34
1328–30
1334–42
1342–52
1352–62
1362–70
Nicholas III
Martin IV6
Honorius IV
Nicholas IV
Celestine V
Boniface VIII
Benedict XI
Clement V (at Avignon, 
from 1309)
John XXII 5 (at Avignon)
Nicholas (V) (at Rome)
Benedict XII (at Avignon)
Clement VI (at Avignon)
Innocent VI (at Avignon)
Urban V (at Avignon)
Gregory XI (at Avignon, 
then Rome from 1377)
1370–78
Urban VI
1378–89
Clement (VII) (at Avignon)
1378–94
Boniface IX
1389–1404
Benedict (XIII) (at Avignon)
1394–1423
Innocent VII
1404–6
Gregory XII
1406–15
Alexander (V) (at Bologna) 1409–10
John (XXIII) (at Bologna)
1410–15
Martin V6
1417–31
Clement (VIII)
1423–29
Eugenius IV
1431–47
Felix (V) (also called 
Amadeus VIII of Savoy)
Nicholas V
Calixtus III (Callistus)
Pius II
Paul II
Sixtus IV
Innocent VIII
Alexander VI
Pius III
Julius II
Leo X
Adrian VI
Clement VII
Paul III
Julius III
Marcellus II
Paul IV
Pius IV
Pius V
Gregory XIII
Sixtus V
Urban VII
Gregory XIV
Innocent IX
Clement VIII
Leo XI
Paul V
Gregory XV
Urban VIII
Innocent X
Alexander VII
Clement IX
Clement X
Innocent XI
Alexander VIII
Innocent XII
Clement XI
Innocent XIII
Benedict XIII
Clement XII
Benedict XIV
Clement XIII
Clement XIV
Pius VI
Pius VII
Leo XII
1439–49
1447–55
1455–58
1458–64
1464–71
1471–84
1484–92
1492–1503
1503–13
1513–21
1522–23
1523–34
1534–49
1550–55
1555–59
1559–65
1566–72
1572–85
1585–90
1590–91
1592–1605
1605–21
1621–23
1623–44
1644–55
1655–67
1667–69
1670–76
1676–89
1689–91
1691–1700
1700–21
1721–24
1724–30
1730–40
1740–58
1758–69
1769–74
1775–99
1800–23
1823–29
ASPENS, and BALSAM POPLARS.
poplar, yellow See TULIP TREE
Popocatépetl
bone china. See also BOW PORCELAIN; CHANTILLY PORCELAIN; CHELSEA PORCELAIN;
MEISSEN PORCELAIN; NYMPHENBURG PORCELAIN; SAINT-CLOUD PORCELAIN; SÈVRES
PORCELAIN; STONEWARE.
porgy
Popular Party (Italy) See ITALIAN POPULAR PARTY
Popular Republican Movement (MRP) French social reform
party. Founded in 1944, the MRP was a strong centre party of the FOURTH
REPUBLIC and the French expression of CHRISTIAN DEMOCRACY. After winning
about 25% of the vote, it declined in the 1950s, losing strength to both
right and left factions. In 1966 it was merged with other right-centre par-
ties to become the Centre Démocrate, which won only 13% of the vote.
By 1968 it had become little more than a political club.
popular sovereignty Political doctrine that allowed the settlers of
U.S. federal territories to decide whether to enter the Union as free or
slave states. It was applied by Sen. STEPHEN A. DOUGLAS as a means to reach
a compromise through passage of the KANSAS-NEBRASKA ACT. Critics of the
doctrine called it “squatter sovereignty.” The resulting violence between
pro- and antislavery factions (see BLEEDING KANSAS) showed its failure as a
workable compromise. See also DRED SCOTT DECISION.
Populares See OPTIMATES AND POPULARES
POPULIST MOVEMENT of the 1890s.
Populist See NARODNIK
Populist Movement Coalition of U.S. agrarian reformers in the Mid-
west and South in the 1890s. The movement developed from farmers’
alliances formed in the 1880s in reaction to falling crop prices and poor
credit facilities. The leaders organized the Populist, or People’s, Party
(1892), which advocated a variety of measures to help farmers. They also
demanded an increase in the circulating currency (to be achieved by the
porphyrin
Porto
in the AMERICAN CIVIL
Porter, Fitz-John (b. Aug. 31,
Portillo, José López See José LÓPEZ PORTILLO
WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.
of Portugal in Christian hands. In 1179 it became the kingdom of Portu-
gal and expanded as it reconquered the Muslim-held sectors. The bound-
aries of modern continental Portugal were completed under King AFONSO
III (reigned 1248–79). From 1580 to 1640 Portugal was united with Spain.
In the 15th and 16th centuries the monarchy encouraged exploration that
took Portuguese navigators to Africa, India, Indonesia, China, the Middle
East, and South America. Although Portugal established several colonies,
they achieved independence over the years (see BRAZIL; GOA; CAPE VERDE;
EAST TIMOR; ANGOLA; GUINEA-BISSAU; MOZAMBIQUE; MACAU). ANTÓNIO DE
OLIVEIRA SALAZAR ruled Portugal as a dictator from 1932 to 1968. The coun-
try’s dictatorship was overthrown in the April 25, 1974, Revolution of the
Carnations. A new constitution was adopted in 1976, and civilian rule
resumed. Portugal was a charter member of NATO and is a member of
the EUROPEAN UNION (EU). In 1999 the government adopted the euro as the
country’s official monetary unit and returned Macau, its last overseas ter-
ritory, to Chinese rule.
Portuguese East Africa See MOZAMBIQUE
Portuguese Guinea See GUINEA-BISSAU
Portuguese West Africa See ANGOLA
Poseidon
positron
nique of the antinovel and magic realism. Postmodernism has also led to a
proliferation of critical theories, most notably DECONSTRUCTION and its off-
shoots, and the breaking down of the distinction between “high” and “low”
culture.
postmortem See AUTOPSY
poststructuralism Movement
in LITERAR Y CRITICISM and philosophy
begun in France in the late 1960s. Drawing upon the linguistic theories
of FERDINAND DE SAUSSURE, the anthropology of CLAUDE LÉVI-STRAUSS (see STRUC-
TURALISM), and the deconstructionist theories of JACQUES DERRIDA (see DECON-
STRUCTION), it held that language is not a transparent medium that connects
one directly with a “truth” or “reality” outside it but rather a structure or
code, whose parts derive their meaning from their contrast with one
another and not from any connection with an outside world. Writers asso-
ciated with the movement include ROLAND BARTHES, JACQUES LACAN, JULIA
KRISTEVA, and MICHEL FOUCAULT.
Potala Palace
Potomac
Poussin
Powell, Robert Baden- See Robert S. BADEN-POWELL
Powhatan
Practical Learning School or Silhak School of thought that arose
Prado
progress toward real democracy. Although Dub:ek believed he could con-
trol the situation, the Soviet Union and the WARSAW PACT countries,
alarmed by the threat of a social-democratic Czechoslovakia, invaded the
country in August, deposed Dub:ek, and gradually restored control by
reinstalling hard-line communists as leaders.
Praia
Pratt Institute Private institution of higher learning in Brooklyn, New
York, New York, U.S. It was founded as a trade school in 1887 by the
industrialist Charles Pratt (1830–91). It comprises schools of architecture,
art and design (for which it is especially renowned), liberal arts and sci-
ences, professional studies, and information and library science. It has
both bachelor’s and master’s degree programs.
pratyaya
preeclampsia
premenstrual syndrome (PMS) Variable group of symptoms
occurring before MENSTRUATION in 40% of women, severe in about 10% of
those. Physical symptoms may include headache, cramps, bloating, and
constipation or diarrhea. Emotional symptoms range from irritability, leth-
argy, and mood swings to hostility, confusion, and depression. Theories as
to the cause centre on hormones, nutrition, and stress (known to affect
severity). Depending on the symptoms, treatment may involve exercise,
stress management, nutritional therapy, or drugs. Dietary measures include
low sodium and high protein and complex carbohydrate intake and avoid-
ance of xanthines (including caffeine). Increasing calcium intake has been
shown to prevent or reduce cramps, which are best treated with ibuprofen.
premier See PRIME MINISTER
Preminger
In the 17th century, preludes began to be frequently written for lute or
harpsichord. In later years the term came to be used for short piano pieces,
often in sets, by composers such as FRÉDÉRIC CHOPIN, ALEKSANDR SCRIABIN,
and CLAUDE DEBUSSY.
1544 I
Presbyterianism (cid:2) pressure gauge
games. See also ELEMENTAR Y EDUCATION.
Prescott, William H(ickling) (b. May 4, 1796, Salem, Mass.,
POSSESSION.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Prestes
Pride, Sir Thomas (b. Somer-
set?, Eng.—d. Oct.
1658,
Worcester House, Surrey) English
soldier. Joining the Parliamentary
army in the ENGLISH CIVIL WARS, he
commanded a regiment in the Battle
of NASEBY (1645), then served with
OLIVER CROMWELL and helped rout the
invading Scots at Preston (1648).
When the army, dominated by the
Independents, occupied London later
that year, Pride arrested or expelled
about 140 Presbyterian members
from the House
of Commons
(“Pride’s Purge”). He was a member
of the commission that tried King
CHARLES I.
Pridi Phanomyong
Primaticcio
Prince Rupert’s Land See RUPERT’S LAND
Prince William Sound Inlet of the Gulf of ALASKA, southern Alaska,
U.S. It lies east of the Kenai Peninsula and spans 90–100 mi (145–160
km). It was named by the British captain GEORGE VANCOUVER in 1778 to
honour a son of GEORGE III. In 1989 one of the most disastrous oil spills
in history occurred when the tanker Exxon Valdez ran aground on Bligh
Reef and lost 10.9 million gallons of crude oil into the sound.
princeps Latin “first one,” “leader” Unofficial title used by
Roman emperors from AUGUSTUS (r. 27 BC–AD 14) to DIOCLETIAN (r. 284–
305), a period called the principate. The title originated during the ROMAN
REPUBLIC, when it was held by the leading member of the Senate. Its use
by Augustus strengthened his claim to be the restorer of republican insti-
tutions and virtues, though he and his successors were in fact autocrats.
See also PRINCE.
Princeton, Battles of Trenton and See Battles of TRENTON AND PRIN-
CETON
Princeton University Private university in Princeton, New Jersey,
U.S., a traditional member of the IVY LEAGUE. Founded as the College of
New Jersey in 1746, it is the fourth oldest university in the U.S. and one
of the most prestigious. WOODROW WILSON served as university president
(1902–10). In addition to an undergraduate college and a graduate school,
Princeton has a school of engineering and applied science and a school
of architecture and urban planning. Its Woodrow Wilson School of Pub-
lic and International Affairs continues a long Princeton tradition of train-
ing government officials. The university has admitted women since 1969.
Princip
through the Pripet Marshes to Mazyr, then joins the DNIEPER RIVER in the
Kiev Reservoir after a course of 480 mi (775 km). It is navigable for 300
mi (483 km) and is connected by canals with the BUG and NEMAN rivers.
Priscian
Prix de Rome
interrupted by sudden leaps that represent major technological advances.
Productivity in Europe and the U.S. made great strides following the
development of such technologies as steam power, the railroad, and the
gasoline motor. Later in the 20th century, advances in productivity
stemmed from a number of innovations, including ASSEMBLY LINEs and AUTO-
MATION, COMPUTER-INTEGRATED MANUFACTURING, DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS,
JUST-IN-TIME MANUFACTURING, and just-in-time INVENTOR Y management.
progeria
See also ENDOSCOPY.
producer goods or capital goods or intermediate goods
production management or operations management Plan-
prokaryote
Progressive Conservative Party of Canada Former Canadian
also SUMMERHILL SCHOOL.
in line with the CONSUMER PRICE INDEX. See also REGRESSIVE TAX.
ment of communism during which a “dictatorship of the proletariat”
would suppress resistance to the socialist revolution by the bourgeoisie,
destroy the social relations of production underlying the class system, and
create a new, classless society.
proline
tem. See also LOGIC, PREDICATE CALCULUS, laws of THOUGHT.
proprioception
by low-income groups. See also CAPITAL-GAINS TAX; CONSUMPTION TAX; INCOME
TAX; PROGRESSIVE TAX; REGRESSIVE TAX.
prophet Person who speaks by divine inspiration, revealing or inter-
preting the will of a god. Prophets have appeared in many religions
throughout history. The most familiar in the West are such OLD TESTAMENT
leaders as MOSES, ISAIAH, and DANIEL, along with the Prophet MUHAMMAD.
In contrast to the diviner or interpreter of omens (see DIVINATION), who may
answer private questions, prophets often address the destiny and moral
life of a whole people. Some prophets seek to create a new society that
will realize their message and thus found new religions. Others may look
only to reform or purify an existing society and religion. The tone of
prophecy ranges widely, from ecstasy, inspired utterance, and ethical fer-
vor to passionate social criticism, prediction of the future, and expecta-
tion of APOCALYPSE.
ISLATIVE APPORTIONMENT.
propositional attitude Psychological state expressed by a verb that
may take a subordinate clause beginning with “that” as its complement.
Verbs such as “believe,” “hope,” “fear,” “desire,” “intend,” and “know”
MALLARMÉ, ARTHUR RIMBAUD, FRIEDRICH HÖLDERLIN, NOVALIS, and RAINER MARIA
RILKE, and in the 20th, AMY LOWELL (in her “polyphonic prose”) and such
contemporary poets as JOHN ASHBER Y.
prosecutor Government attorney who presents the state’s case against
the defendant in a criminal prosecution. In some countries (France, Japan),
public prosecution is carried out by a single office. In the U.S., states and
counties have their own prosecutors. Only at the federal level is the sys-
tem unitary; the U.S. attorney general’s office appoints a U.S. attorney for
each federal district. In most state and local jurisdictions, prosecutors are
elected to office. Whether elected or appointed, prosecutors are often sub-
ject to political pressures. A prosecutor takes charge of the investigation
once a crime has been committed, presents evidence at a hearing before
a grand jury, and questions witnesses during the trial. See also INDEPENDENT
COUNSEL.
Proserpina See PERSEPHONE
prosody
sion, but in 1947 it became one of 23 nations to sign the GENERAL AGREEMENT
ON TARIFFS AND TRADE (GATT), which substantially reduced customs tariffs
while reducing or eliminating quotas. Despite trade agreements such as
GATT and NAFTA, calls for protectionism are still heard in many coun-
tries when industries suffer severely from foreign competition. See also
TRADE AGREEMENT; WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION.
proteolysis
Protococcus
INTERNATIONAL.
Proulx
EASE; he later studied the related sheep disorder scrapie and in 1982
reported isolation of its causative agent, which he called a prion. Initially
criticized, his prion theory was eventually generally accepted, and his
research received world attention when MAD COW DISEASE emerged in Brit-
ain. The theory may also shed light on disorders such as ALZHEIMER DISEASE
and PARKINSONISM, which share traits with prion-based diseases. His work
won him a 1997 Nobel Prize.
Prussia German Preussen
psychoneurosis See NEUROSIS
psychosis
CHOLOGY. In INFANCY, language is acquired, PERCEPTION, EMOTION, and MEMOR Y
take shape, and learning and motor skills develop. In childhood, SPEECH
emerges, cognitive abilities advance from concrete to abstract operations,
emotional responses become more sophisticated, and EMPATHY and moral
reasoning begin to be employed. ADOLESCENCE is a time of rapid emotional
and intellectual growth, while ADULTHOOD is characterized by the maturing
of all developmental processes.
psychological testing Use of tests to measure skill, knowledge, intel-
ligence, capacities, or aptitudes and to make predictions about perfor-
mance. Best known is the IQ test; other tests include achievement tests—
designed to evaluate a student’s grade or performance level—and
PERSONALITY tests. The latter include both inventory-type (question-and-
response) tests and projective tests such as the Rorschach (inkblot) and
thematic apperception (picture-theme) tests, which are used by clinical
psychologists and psychiatrists to help diagnose mental disorders and by
psychotherapists and counselors to help assess their clients. Experimen-
tal psychologists routinely devise tests to obtain data on PERCEPTION, LEARN-
ING, and MOTIVATION. Clinical neuropsychologists often use tests to assess
cognitive functioning of people with brain injuries. See also EXPERIMENTAL
PSYCHOLOGY; PSYCHOMETRICS.
OGY, EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY, sports psychology, SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY, and
COMPARATIVE PSYCHOLOGY. The issues studied by psychologists cover a wide
spectrum, including LEARNING, COGNITION, INTELLIGENCE, motivation, EMOTION,
PERCEPTION, PERSONALITY, and the extent to which individual differences are
shaped by genetics or environment. The methods used in psychological
research include observation, interviews, PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING, laboratory
experimentation, and statistical analysis.
psychometrics Science of psychological measurement. Psychometri-
cians design and administer psychological tests (see PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING),
ptarmigan
through the construction of highways and public buildings. Authorized by
the National Industrial Recovery Act (1933) and administered by Harold
Ickes, it spent about $4 billion to build schools, courthouses, city halls,
public-health facilities, and roads, bridges, dams, and subways. It was
gradually dismantled as the country moved to a military-industrial
economy during World War II.
Public Works of Art Project (PWAP) First of the U.S. federal art
Pucci
deaths and a proliferation of hospitals. Britain’s Public Health Act of 1848
established a special public health ministry. In the U.S., public health is
studied and coordinated on a national level by the CENTERS FOR DISEASE
CONTROL AND PREVENTION; internationally, the WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Public Safety, Committee of See COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC SAFETY
public school or independent school In the United Kingdom, any
of a small group of tuition-charging secondary schools that specialize in
preparing students for university and for public service. The name public
school dates from the 18th century, when the schools began attracting stu-
dents from beyond their immediate environs and thus became “public” as
opposed to local. Such schools are thus in fact private schools indepen-
dent of the state system. Although many schools have become coeduca-
tional, only boys attend the historically important schools Winchester
(1394), ETON (1440–41), Westminster (1560), and HARROW (1571); well-
known girls’ schools include Cheltenham (1853), Roedean (1885), and
Wycomb Abbey (1896). Public schools cultivated a class-conscious code
of behaviour, speech, and appearance that set the standard for British offi-
cialdom from the early 19th century. See also SECONDAR Y EDUCATION.
public television See PBS
public transportation See MASS TRANSIT
public utility Enterprise that provides certain classes of services to the
public, including common-carrier transportation (buses, airlines, rail-
roads); telephone and telegraph services; power, heat and light; and com-
munity facilities for water and sanitation. In most countries such
enterprises are state-owned and state-operated; in the U.S. they are mainly
privately owned, but they operate under close regulation. Given the tech-
nology of production and distribution,
they are considered natural
MONOPOLIES, since the CAPITAL costs for such enterprises are large and the
existence of competing or parallel systems would be inordinately expen-
sive and wasteful. Government regulation in the U.S., particularly at the
state level, aims to ensure safe operation, reasonable rates, and service on
equal terms to all customers. Some states have experimented with deregu-
lation of electricity and natural-gas operations to stimulate price reduc-
tions and improved service through competition, but the results have not
been universally promising.
Public Works Administration U.S. government agency (1933–39).
It was established as part of the NEW DEAL to reduce unemployment
Puente
Pugachov
pulmonary alveolus
PRESS.
Punctation of Olmütz See OLMÜTZ, PUNCTATION OF
built for the usually itinerant puppeteers. Companies presented favourite
stories of the French Guignol,
the Italian Arlecchino,
the German
Kasperle, and the English PUNCH and Judy. By the mid 20th century pup-
petry had reached television with JIM HENSON’s Muppets. See also BUN-
RAKU; SERGEY OBRAZTSOV.
Puracé
the stretch of the AMAZON RIVER upstream from MANAUS known as the
Solimões River. At its mouth it divides into numerous branches. Most of
its 1,995-mi (3,211-km) course is navigable, as are the many lakes formed
near its shores. Rubber is gathered from forests along its course.
purusha See PRAKRITI AND PURUSHA
Pusan
pyelonephritis
member, pyrimidine itself (C4H4N2), is not common, but derivatives with
the structure are. Examples include THIAMINE (vitamin B1), several SULFA
DRUGS, BARBITURATES, and three of the bases in NUCLEIC ACIDS (CYTOSINE, THYM-
INE, and URACIL).
pyrite
Qadariya
Qayraw)n, Al- See KAIROUAN
Qazvln or Kazvln
Qizilqum See KYZYLKUM
Qo!qon
and farms. Quantrill’s Raiders were made an official troop by the Con-
federates in 1862. In 1863 Quantrill and his group of about 450 men
sacked the free-state town of Lawrence, Kan., killing 150 people. They
later defeated a Union detachment, killing 90 soldiers. Quantrill was mor-
tally wounded in a raid into Kentucky.
quantum In physics, a discrete natural unit, or packet, of energy, charge,
angular momentum, or other physical property. Light, for example, which
appears in some respects as a continuous electromagnetic wave, on the
submicroscopic level is emitted and absorbed in discrete amounts, or
quanta; for light of a given wavelength, the magnitude of all the quanta
emitted or absorbed is the same in both energy and momentum. These
particlelike packets of light are called PHOTONS, a term also applicable to
quanta of other forms of electromagnetic energy such as X RAYS and GAMMA
RAYS. Submicroscopic mechanical vibrations in the layers of atoms com-
prising CR YSTALS also give up or take on energy and momentum in quanta
called PHONONS. See also QUANTUM MECHANICS.
quantum chromodynamics (QCD) Theory that describes the
PUTING, QUANTUM MECHANICS.
quantum electrodynamics (QED) Quantum theory of the interac-
THEOR Y, UNIFIED FIELD THEOR Y.
quantum mechanics Branch of mathematical physics that deals with
atomic and subatomic systems. It is concerned with phenomena that are
so small-scale that they cannot be described in classical terms, and it is
formulated entirely in terms of statistical probabilities. Considered one of
the great ideas of the 20th century, quantum mechanics was developed
mainly by NIELS BOHR, ERWIN SCHRÖDINGER, WERNER HEISENBERG, and MAX
BORN and led to a drastic reappraisal of the concept of objective reality. It
explained the structure of ATOMs, atomic nuclei (see NUCLEUS), and MOL-
ECULEs; the behaviour of SUBATOMIC PARTICLEs; the nature of chemical bonds
(see BONDING); the properties of crystalline solids (see CR YSTAL); NUCLEAR
ENERGY; and the forces that stabilize collapsed STARs. It also led directly to
the development of the LASER, the ELECTRON MICROSCOPE, and the TRANSISTOR.
Qu’Appelle
quasar
Queneau
the QUEEN CHARLOTTE ISLANDS and on the south by VANCOUVER ISLAND, the
Queen Elizabeth National Park or Ruwenzori National
the theory of probability to social phenomena. He collected and analyzed
government statistics on crime, mortality, and other subjects and devised
improvements
in census
taking.
In Sur
l’homme
(1835)
L’Anthropométrie (1871) he developed the notion of the homme moyen,
the statistically “average man.” A founder of quantitative social science,
he was nonetheless widely criticized for the crudeness of his methodology.
quetzal
quinine
attempt to ring it or come as near to it as possible. Quoits may have been
played in Roman-occupied Britain (1st–5th century AD), and it may have
given rise to HORSESHOE PITCHING.
Q(qon See QO!QON
Qur#)n
Ra See RE
Rabanus Maurus or Hrabanus Maurus
ringed tail and a black mask on the
face. The North American raccoon
(P. lotor) has a stout body, short legs,
pointed muzzle, and small erect ears.
is 30–36 in. (75–90 cm) long,
including the 10-in. (25-cm) tail, and
weighs over 22 lb (10 kg). The
shaggy, coarse fur is iron-gray to
blackish. The feet resemble slender
human hands. Raccoons eat arthro-
pods, rodents, frogs, berries, fruit,
and plants; in towns and cities they
thrive on garbage. They prefer woods
near water and usually live in hollow
trees. The crab-eating raccoon (P.
cancrivorus) of South America is
similar but has coarser fur.
race Term once commonly used in
PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY to denote a
and history. See also CLIMATIC ADAPTATION, ETHNIC GROUP, RACISM.
racemate
London newspaper, he also began illustrating books. He became skillful
using the new halftone process, and his highly detailed drawings revealed
a unique imagination. He achieved renown with a 1900 edition of
Grimm’s Fairy Tales, and his illustrations for Rip Van Winkle (1905)
brought him recognition in America as well. Altogether he illustrated more
than 60 books, including classics of children’s literature as well as works
by WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, CHARLES DICKENS, JOHN MILTON, RICHARD WAGNER, and
EDGAR ALLAN POE.
radar astronomy See RADIO AND RADAR ASTRONOMY
NOVEL.
Radcliffe-Brown, A(lfred) R(eginald) (b. Jan. 17, 1881, Birming-
ham, Warwick, Eng.—d. Oct. 24, 1955, London) British social anthro-
pologist. He taught at the universities of Cape Town, Sydney, Chicago,
and Oxford. In his version of FUNCTIONALISM, he viewed the component parts
of society (e.g., the kinship system, the legal system) as having an indis-
pensable function for one another, the continued existence of one com-
ponent being dependent on that of the other, and he developed a
systematic framework of concepts relating to the social structures of
small-scale societies. He had a profound impact on British and American
social anthropology. Among his major works are The Andaman Islanders
(1922) and Structure and Function in Primitive Society (1952).
Radek
CIRCUITS. See also RADIO AND RADAR ASTRONOMY.
radio broadcasting See BROADCASTING
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Radical Republican (cid:2) radish
Lovell Telescope, a fully steerable radio telescope at Jodrell Bank, Macclesfield,
Cheshire, Eng.
JODRELL BANK SCIENCE CENTRE
radiocarbon dating See CARBON-14 DATING
radiology Branch of medicine that uses RADIATION for diagnosis (DIAGNOS-
TIC IMAGING) and treatment (RADIATION THERAPY) of disease. Originally, it
involved X RAYS for diagnosis and X rays, GAMMA RAYS, and other ionizing
radiation for treatment. Diagnostic methods now include isotope scanning
(see NUCLEAR MEDICINE), use of nonion-
izing radiation, as in ULTRASOUND and
magnetic resonance imaging, and
radioimmunoassay (in which radio-
active isotopes in antibodies against
hormones detect minute amounts of
hormones for diagnosis of endocrine
disorders).
Radiotherapy
includes, in cancer treatment, radio-
active hormones and chemothera-
peutic drugs.
radiotherapy
RADIATION
THERAPY
radish Annual or biennial plant
(Raphanus sativus) of the MUSTARD
FAMILY, probably of Oriental origin,
Radish (Raphanus sativus variety radic-
INGMAR HOLMASEN
grown for its large, succulent root.
Low in calories and high in bulk,
radishes have a sharp taste and are
usually eaten raw. The shape of the
edible portion of the root varies
greatly, as does the color
(from
white through pink to red, purple,
and black). Radishes may weigh
only a few ounces (U.S. and Euro-
pean varieties) or, in the case of the
Japanese daikon, more than 2 lbs (1
Radishchev
(1854), he gave an ambiguous order in the Battle of BALAKLAVA that led to
the disastrous charge of the Light Cavalry Brigade under the earl of CAR-
DIGAN. Raglan became the scapegoat for the campaign’s lack of progress
and the inadequate supplies to the troops in the winter of 1854–55. His
name was applied to the raglan sleeve, probably designed to adapt his
coat to the arm he had amputated after the Battle of WATERLOO.
Ragnarök
Rainey, Ma orig. Gertrude Malissa Nix Pridgett (b. April 26,
Rainier
Rally for the Republic (RPR) or Gaullists Former French politi-
cal party. It was founded by JACQUES CHIRAC in 1976 as the successor to
the various Gaullist coalitions that dominated the political life of the FIFTH
REPUBLIC under CHARLES DE GAULLE and GEORGES POMPIDOU. The party had its
religious life. In 1901 he left his wife and children and went into seclu-
sion in the Himalayas, and he later traveled to Japan and the U.S. He
became known for his poetic manner of interpreting VEDANTA and for his
joyful approach to religious learning as a means to the liberation of the
individual. He died by drowning in the Ganges.
Ramayana
Rangeley
its peak in the 1880s. By the early 20th century, overstocking, quarantine
laws, railroad competition, and barbed-wire fences had put an end to cattle
drives and open-range farming. Ranching today is nearly all sedentary,
but huge ranches still exist.
Rand, Ayn orig. Alice Rosenbaum or Alissa Rosenbaum (b.
random-access memory See RAM
Rankine
Raphael In the BIBLE and the QUR#0N, one of the archangels. In the apoc-
ryphal book of Tobit he appears in human disguise and conquers the
demon Asmodeus. His name in Hebrew means “God has healed,” and in
Tobit his business is to heal the earth. Raphael is reckoned among the
saints in both Eastern and Western churches, and his feast day is October
Rapier
Rathbone, (Philip St. John) Basil (b. June 13, 1892, Johannesburg,
Rathenau
Rauschenberg
MANTA RAY.
FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT to JOHN F. KENNEDY.
Rayleigh
Ray, Man See MAN Ray
Ray, Nicholas orig. Raymond Nicholas Kienzle (b. Aug. 7,
ray flower See COMPOSITE FAMILY
Rayburn, Sam(uel) (Taliaferro) (b. Jan. 6, 1882, Roane county,
Tenn., U.S.—d. Nov. 16, 1961, Bonham, Texas) U.S. politician. He taught
school in Texas before becoming a lawyer. He served in the state legis-
lature from 1907 to 1913. In 1912 he was elected as a Democrat to the
U.S. House of Representatives, where he served for the next 48 years,
Rayonism
JASPER JOHNS.
Reagan
Récamier
red elm See SLIPPER Y ELM
DYNASTY.
older BLACK-FIGURE POTTER Y as the pre-
red fox or common fox Either
of two FOX species: Vulpes vulpes,
found throughout Europe, temperate
Asia, and northern Africa, and V.
fulva of North America. It has a red-
dish brown coat; the tail is white-tipped, and the ears and legs are black.
Red foxes are 36–42 in. (90–105 cm) long, including the 15-in. (38-cm)
tail; they stand about 16 in. (40 cm) tall and weigh about 15 lb (7 kg).
They eat small mammals, eggs, fruit, and birds. They are hunted for sport
and for their fur and are raised commercially for pelts. North American
red foxes exhibit black and silver colour phases.
Red Guards Paramilitary units of radical university and high-school
students formed during the Chinese CULTURAL REVOLUTION. Responding in
1966 to MAO ZEDONG’s call to revitalize the revolutionary spirit of the CHI-
NESE COMMUNIST PARTY, they went so far as to attempt to purge the country
of its pre-Communist culture. With a membership in the millions, they
attacked and persecuted local party leaders, schoolteachers, and other
intellectuals. By early 1967 they had overthrown party authorities in many
localities. Internal strife ensued as different units argued over which
among them best represented MAOISM. In 1968 their disruption of indus-
trial production and urban life led the government to redirect them to the
countryside, where the movement gradually subsided.
Red River Chinese Yuan Chiang
SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS.
Red Army Faction See BAADER-MEINHOF GANG
Redford (Jr.), (Charles) Robert (b. Aug. 18, 1937, Santa Monica,
Redgrave, Sir Michael (Scudamore) (b. March 20, 1908, Bris-
red salmon See SOCKEYE SALMON
Red Sea Narrow inland sea between the ARABIAN PENINSULA and Africa.
It extends southeast from Suez, Egypt, for about 1,200 mi (1,930 km) to
the Strait of MANDEB, which connects with the Gulf of ADEN and then with
the Arabian Sea. It separates the coasts of Egypt, The Sudan, and Eritrea
from those of Saudi Arabia and Yemen. It contains some of the world’s
warmest and saltiest seawater. With its connection to the Mediterranean
Sea via the SUEZ CANAL, it is one of the most heavily traveled waterways
in the world, carrying traffic between Europe and Asia. Its name is derived
from the colour changes observed in its waters.
red soil Any of a group of soils that develop in a warm, temperate, moist
climate under deciduous or mixed forests and that have thin organic and
organic-mineral layers overlying a yellowish-brown leached layer resting
on an illuvial (see ILLUVIATION) red layer. Red soils generally form from
iron-rich SEDIMENTAR Y ROCK. They are usually poor growing soils, low in
nutrients and HUMUS and difficult to cultivate.
red spider See SPIDER MITE
Red Square Large public square, central MOSCOW. It lies north of the
MOSKVA RIVER, adjacent to the Kremlin, and covers some 18 acres (7.3
hectares). Dating from the late 15th century, it has long been a busy mar-
ket area as well as a focal point in Russian history as the scene of execu-
tions, demonstrations, riots, and parades. Located around it are the State
Historical Museum (1875–81), the nine-towered Cathedral of St. Basil the
Blessed (1554–60), the former state department store GUM, and the tomb
of VLADIMIR ILICH LENIN. The square and Kremlin were designated a UNESCO
WORLD HERITAGE SITE in 1990.
HONGWU EMPEROR.
redbird See CARDINAL
redbud Any of the shrubs or small
trees that make up the genus Cercis
(family Leguminosae), native to
North America, southern Europe,
and Asia, and widely planted for
HENRI MATISSE and other painters. His prints (nearly 200 in all), which
explore fantastic, often macabre themes, foreshadowed SURREALISM and
DADA.
Redouté
reed organ See HARMONIUM
Reeds, Plain of Vietnamese Dong Thap Muoi
CONDITIONING; COOLING SYSTEM; HEAT EXCHANGER.
REFUGEE ORGANIZATION; Office of the UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR
REFUGEES; UNITED NATIONS RELIEF AND REHABILITATION ADMINISTRATION.
Refusés, Salon des See SALON DES REFUSÉS
Régence style
regiment In most armies, a body of troops headed by a colonel and
divided into companies, BATTALIONS, or squadrons. French CAVALR Y units
were called regiments as early as 1558. In early U.S. service, as in Euro-
pean armies up to that time, the usual number of companies in a regiment
was 10. Early in the 19th century, NAPOLEON divided the regiments of the
French army into three battalions each, and in 1901 the U.S. Army adopted
the three-battalion INFANTR Y regimental system.
Regina
Reims or Rheims
also OBJECT-ORIENTED PROGRAMMING.
relief or rilievo
ignorance of humanity’s true higher identity and that prayer can bring
about healing not only of spiritual but of physical ailments.
Remagen
blockage, congenital diseases, and tapeworm infestation. The most seri-
ous is medullary cystic disease, which has no warning symptoms but
causes ANEMIA, low blood sodium levels, and UREMIA. The kidneys become
shrunken, grainy, and scarred. Cysts should usually be checked surgically
to rule out cancer. See also UROGENITAL MALFORMATION.
renal failure See KIDNEY FAILURE
renal system See URINAR Y SYSTEM
Renan
Repin
Republican Party, National See NATIONAL REPUBLICAN PARTY
LIOZ, GIUSEPPE VERDI, GABRIEL FAURÉ, JOHANNES BRAHMS, and BENJAMIN BRITTEN.
FAIR TRADE LAW.
resin
petitive in the South for more than a century after the war. Republican
candidates won 14 of 18 presidential elections between 1860 and 1932,
through support from an alliance of Northern and Midwestern farmers and
big-business interests. In 1912 the party split between a progressive wing
led by THEODORE ROOSEVELT and a conservative wing led by Pres. WILLIAM
HOWARD TAFT; the rift enabled the Democratic candidate, Woodrow Wil-
son, to win that year’s election. The Republican Party’s inability to
counter the impact of the GREAT DEPRESSION led to its ouster from power in
1933; in 1953 the presidency of DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER brought a moder-
ate wing of the party to prominence. The party’s platform remained con-
servative, emphasizing anticommunism, reduced government regulation
Resnais
DNA RECOMBINATION).
restrictive covenant In property law, an agreement acknowledged in
a deed or lease that restricts the free use or occupancy of property, such
as by forbidding commercial use or certain types of structures. The restric-
tive covenant is as old as the law of property, being well-established in
Roman law. The term is also used in business law to refer to an agree-
ment whereby one party promises not to engage in the same business or
a similar business in a particular area for a period of time.
retailing Selling of merchandise directly to the consumer. Retailing
began several thousand years ago with peddlers hawking their wares at
the earliest marketplaces. It is extremely competitive, and the failure rate
of retail establishments is relatively high. Price is the most important arena
of competition, but other factors include convenience of location, selec-
tion and display of merchandise, attractiveness of the establishment, and
reputation. The diversity of retailing is evident in the many forms it now
takes, including VENDING MACHINEs, door-to-door and telephone sales, DIRECT-
MAIL MARKETING, the Internet, discount houses, specialty stores, DEPARTMENT
STOREs, supermarkets, and consumer COOPERATIVEs.
retaining wall or revetment Wall constructed to hold in place a
mass of earth or prevent the erosion of an embankment. It may also be
battered, with the face inclined toward the load it is bearing. The most
basic type of reinforced retaining wall is the massive concrete gravity
wall, which is prevented from falling over by the sheer weight and vol-
ume of its mass. A CANTILEVER (L-shaped) retaining wall resists overturn-
ing by means of cantilever footings, spread footings (see FOUNDATION)
shaped to resist overturning and sliding.
reticuloendothelial
Restoration Restoration of the monarchy in England in 1660. It marked
the return of CHARLES II as king (1660–85) following the period of OLIVER
CROMWELL’s Commonwealth. The bishops were restored to Parliament,
which established a strict Anglican orthodoxy. The period, which also
included the reign of JAMES II (1685–88), was marked by an expansion in
colonial trade, the ANGLO-DUTCH WARS, and a revival of drama and litera-
ture (see RESTORATION LITERATURE).
LIAM WYCHERLY, JOHN VANBRUGH, WILLIAM CONGREVE, and GEORGE FARQUHAR.
retrovirus
revetment See RETAINING WALL
Revillagigedo
course of a year, written in peasant dialect. Translated into many languages,
it won Reymont the 1924 Nobel Prize for Literature.
Reynaud
rheumatic
Rhodesia See ZIMBABWE
Rhodesian ridgeback or African lion dog South African hound
breed characterized by a narrow
band of hair growing forward along
its back, against the direction of the
rest of the coat. The ridge is inher-
ited from a half-wild local hunting
dog that was crossbred with Euro-
pean dogs. Strong, active, and of
great endurance, it is trim and short-
haired, with hanging ears and a
glossy brown coat. It stands 24–27
in. (61–69 cm) and weighs 65–75 lbs
(30–34 kg). It is an able guard and
hunter (especially of lions) and a
good companion.
Rhodian Sea Law
One of the SEVEN WONDERS OF THE
WORLD, it was toppled by an earth-
quake c. 225 BC. The fallen Colossus
was left in place until AD 653, when
raiding Arabs broke up its remains
and sold the bronze for scrap.
Rhodes scholarship Grant
attend the University of OXFORD. The
program was established in 1902 by
the will of CECIL RHODES. Until 1976,
candidates had to be unmarried male
residents in a Commonwealth coun-
try, the U.S., or South Africa. In 1976
women were accepted. Two candi-
dates each year are also chosen from
Germany. The scholarships, which
are highly competitive, are usually for two years.
Rhodesia Region, south-central Africa, now divided into ZIMBABWE in
the south and ZAMBIA in the north. Named after British colonial adminis-
trator CECIL RHODES, it was administered by the British South Africa Com-
pany in the 19th century and exploited mostly for its gold, copper, and
coal deposits. In 1911 it was divided into Northern and Southern Rhode-
sia; Southern Rhodesia became a self-governing British colony (1923) and
Northern Rhodesia a British protectorate (1924). They joined with Nyasa-
land to become the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland (1953–63). See
also MALAWI.
lands from cold northerly winds. The mountains were a refuge for Slavic
peoples during the period of Turkish rule (15th–19th century), and ancient
customs survive. The lakes, river valleys, and extensive forests form the
basis of a tourist industry.
rhodopsin
in the BAROQUE PERIOD.
riboflavin
Richard, (Joseph Henri) Maurice (b. Aug. 4, 1921, Montreal, Que.,
Richards,
I(vor) A(rmstrong)
Richards, (Isaac) Vivian (Alexander) (b. March 7, 1952, St.
Richardson, Henry Handel orig. Ethel Florence Lindesay
Richardson, Sir Ralph (David) (b. Dec. 19, 1902, Cheltenham,
Richardson, Tony orig. Cecil Antonio Richardson (b. June 5,
Richelieu
Richelieu River
(named RICKETTSIA) that causes ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER and epidemic
rickettsia
Rietveld
Río de la Plata, Viceroyalty of the Last of the four viceroyalties
Rio Grande
its in the kingdom in the 1930s transformed the old provincial town into
a showplace of sophisticated technology, modern architecture, and high-
ways. In addition to its administrative role, Riyadh is the kingdom’s com-
mercial, education, and transportation centre.
Rizal (y Alonso)
Robbe-Grillet
Robertson, Pat orig. Marion Gordon Robertson (b. March 23,
Roberval
Robinson, Edward G. orig. Emmanuel Goldenberg (b. Dec.
Robinson, Jackie in full Jack Roosevelt Robinson (b. Jan. 31,
the NEGRO LEAGUES
Robinson, Joan (Violet) orig. Joan (Violet) Maurice (b. Oct.
Robinson, Smokey orig. William Robinson (b. Feb. 19, 1940,
Robinson, Sugar Ray orig. Walker Smith, Jr. (b. May 3, 1921,
BON. Known to the Romans as Promontorium Magnum, the cape is a nar-
row granite cliff, 472 ft (144 m) high, forming the western end of the
Sintra Mountains.
rocaille
Rockingham, Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd marquess
of (b. May 13, 1730—d. July 1, 1782, London, Eng.) British politician.
From 1751 to 1762 he served as gentleman of the bedchamber for GEORGE
II and then GEORGE III, who appointed him prime minister in 1765. He
obtained repeal of the unpopular STAMP ACT but agreed to the passage of
the DECLARATOR Y ACT. His ministry collapsed through internal dissension in
1766. He and EDMUND BURKE led the parliamentary opposition to the min-
istries in power and spoke in favour of independence for the American
colonies. In his brief second ministry (1782), he began peace negotiations
with the U.S. and obtained legislative independence for the Irish parlia-
ment.
Rockne
into the METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART).
LAWS OF MOTION).
rocket See ARUGULA
rockfish or stonefish Name applied to species in the SCORPION-FISH
family (Scorpaenidae), including the LIONFISH, REDFISH, and ZEBRA FISH. In
and gypsum. ROCKY MOUNTAIN, YELLOWSTONE, and GRAND TETON national
parks in the U.S. are major recreational facilities.
Rococo
Roebling
near Point Barrow, Alaska) U.S. humorist and actor. Raised in Indian Ter-
ritory, he demonstrated his rope-twirling skills in Wild West shows and
vaudeville and gradually wove bits of homespun wit into his act. He was
popular in New York City from 1905 and starred in FLORENZ ZIEGFELD’s
Midnight Frolic (1915). Noted for his good-natured but sharp criticism of
current affairs, he wrote a newspaper column in the New York Times (from
1922) as well as several books. He performed on radio and in movies
such as State Fair (1933) and Steamboat Round the Bend (1935). His
death in a plane crash in Alaska with the aviator Wiley Post (1899–1935)
was widely mourned.
Roget
Rolle’s theorem
roman à clef
FRENCH, SPANISH, PORTUGUESE,
Roman Republic and Empire (cid:2) Romania
Roman Emperors*
Augustus
27 BC–AD 14
Tiberius
14–37
Caligula
37–41
Claudius
41–54
54–68
Galba
68–69
Vitellius
Vespasian
69–79
Titus
79–81
Domitian
81–96
Nerva
96–98
Trajan
98–117
Hadrian
117–38
Antoninus Pius
138–61
Marcus Aurelius
161–80
Lucius Verus
161–69
Commodus
177–92
Pertinax
Didius Julianus
Septimius Severus
193–211
Caracalla
198–217
209–12
Macrinus
217–18
Elagabalus
218–22
Severus Alexander
222–35
Maximin
235–38
Gordian I
Gordian II
Maximus
Balbinus
Gordian III
238–44
Philip
244–49
Decius
249–51
Hostilian
Gallus
251–53
Aemilian
Valerian
253–60
Gallienus
253–68
Claudius II Gothicus
268–70
Quintillus
269–70
Aurelian
270–75
Tacitus
275–76
Florian
Probus
276–82
*For Eastern emperors after the fall of Rome, see BYZANTINE EMPIRE.
Carus
Carinus
Numerian
Constantine I
Constantine II
Constans I
Constantius II
Magnentius
Julian
Jovian
Theodosius I
East only
Diocletian
Galerius
Licinius
Valens
Procopius
Arcadius
Theodosius II
Marcian
Leo I
Leo II
West only
Maximian
Constantius I Chlorus 
Severus
Maxentius
Valentinian I
Gratian
Valentinian II
Honorius
Constantius III
Valentinian III
Petronius Maximus
Avitus
Majorian
Libius Severus
Anthemius
Olybrius
Glycerius
Julius Nepos
Romulus Augustulus
282–83
283–85
283–84
312–37
337–40
337–50
337–61
350–53
361–63
363–64
379–95
284–305
305–11
308–24
364–78
365–66
395–408
408–50
450–57
457–74
474–91
286–305
306–8
305–6
306–7
306–12
364–75
375–83
375–92
395–423
425–55
455–56
457–61
461–67
467–72
473–74
474–75
475–76
of learning. See also ROMANESQUE ARCHITECTURE.
Romania or Rumania Country, northeastern BALKAN PENINSULA, south-
eastern Europe. Area: 92,043 sq mi (238,391 sq km). Population (2005
est.): 21,602,000. Capital: BUCHAREST. Most of the people are Romanian; a
minority are Hungarian. Language: Romanian (official). Religion: Chris-
tianity (predominantly Eastern Orthodox; also Protestant, Roman Catho-
lic). Currency: leu. The land is dominated by the great arc of the CARPATHIAN
MOUNTAINS, whose highest peak, Moldoveanu, reaches an elevation of
8,346 ft (2,544 m). The DANUBE RIVER forms most of the southern boundary
with Bulgaria. Under communist rule (1948–89), Romania had a centrally
planned economy that was transformed from an agricultural into an indus-
trial economy. From 1991 the postcommunist government began returning
industrial and commercial enterprises to the private sector. Romania is a
republic with two legislative houses; its chief of state is the president, and
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Romanian language
created the EUROPEAN ATOMIC ENERGY COMMUNITY.
Rommel
ment agency for their protection. The state of Rondônia, created in 1982
from the former Guaporé territory, was named for him.
r§nin
rorqual
Roosevelt, Theodore known as Teddy Roosevelt (b. Oct. 27,
1858, New York, N.Y., U.S.—d. Jan. 6, 1919, Oyster Bay, N.Y.) 26th
president of the U.S. (1901–09). He was elected to the New York legis-
lature (1882), where he became a Republican leader opposed to the Demo-
cratic political machine. After political defeats and the death of his wife,
he went to the Dakota Territory to ranch. He returned to New York to
serve on the U.S. Civil Service Commission (1889–95) and as head of the
city’s board of police commissioners (1895–97). A supporter of WILLIAM
MCKINLEY, he served as assistant secretary of the navy (1897–98). When
the SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR was declared, he resigned to organize a cavalry
unit, the ROUGH RIDERS. He returned to New York a hero and was elected
governor in 1899. As the Republican vice-presidential nominee, he took
office when McKinley was reelected, and he became president on Mc-
Kinley’s assassination in 1901. One of his early initiatives was to urge
enforcement of the SHERMAN ANTITRUST ACT against business monopolies.
He won election in his own right in 1904, defeating ALTON PARKER. At his
urging, Congress regulated railroad rates and passed the Pure Food and
Drug Act and Meat Inspection Act (1906) to protect public health. He
created national forests and set aside mineral, oil, and coal deposits for
conservation. He and secretary of state ELIHU ROOT announced the
Roosevelt corollary to the MONROE DOCTRINE, which reasserted the U.S.’s
position as protector of the Western Hemisphere. For mediating an end
to the RUSSO-JAPANESE WAR, he received the 1906 Nobel Prize for Peace.
He secured a treaty with Panama for construction of a trans-isthmus canal.
Declining to seek reelection, he secured the nomination for WILLIAM H.
TAFT. After traveling in Africa and Europe, he tried to win the Republican
presidential nomination in 1912; when he was rejected, he organized the
BULL MOOSE PARTY and ran on a policy of NEW NATIONALISM. Though he lost
the election, he secured 88 electoral votes—the most successful third-
party candidacy in the 20th century. Throughout his life he continued to
write, publishing extensively on history, politics, travel, and nature. See
also BIG STICK POLICY; THEODORE ROOSEVELT NATIONAL PARK.
Roosevelt Island formerly (until 1921) Blackwell’s Island and
Rosa, Salvator (b.
Rosas
larly noteworthy. In later FLAMBOYANT-STYLE tracery, the radiating elements
consisted of an intricate network of wavy, double-curved bars.
Roseau
tions (1911–12) to the South Pole by ROALD AMUNDSEN and ROBERT FALCON
SCOTT and RICHARD E. BYRD’s expeditions (1928–41). It is the site of sev-
eral permanent research stations.
Rosse, William Parsons, 3rd earl of (b. June 17, 1800, York,
Rossellini
Ross, Diana See SUPREMES
Ross, John Indian name Tsan-Usdi (“Little John”) (b. Oct. 3,
BURNE-JONES
and WILLIAM MORRIS.
more easily sell
to acquaintances,
and became very successful. The
group broke up in 1852, but Rossetti
in 1856 with EDWARD
revived it
After the death of his long-ailing
wife in 1862, possibly by suicide, lit-
erary themes gave way to pictures of
women, particularly Morris’s wife,
Jane. His poetry, including the son-
net sequence “The House of Life,”
was widely admired. He broke with
Morris in 1875 over his love for Jane
and spent his later years as an alco-
holic recluse.
Rossetti, Gabriele (Pasquale
Giuseppe)
dren, including CHRISTINA ROSSETTI and DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI.
Rossini, Gioacchino (Antonio) (b. Feb. 29, 1792, Pesaro, Papal
Rosso
Rothko, Mark orig. Marcus Rothkowitz (b. Sept. 25, 1903,
rotifer
Rousseau
Royal Greenwich
to COVENT GARDEN in 1946. ALICIA MARKOVA, MARGOT FONTEYN, and ROBERT
HELPMANN were among the company’s early members. By the 1950s the
Sadler’s Wells Ballet had expanded to include its own school and a sepa-
rate touring company; in 1956 it received a royal charter and was renamed
the Royal Ballet. Dancers such as RUDOLF NUREYEV and choreographers such
as FREDERICK ASHTON, KENNETH MACMILLAN, and BRONISLAVA NIJINSKA were
associated with the company.
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew See KEW GARDENS
Royal Canadian Mounted Police or Mounties Federal police
force of Canada. It is also the criminal and provincial force in all prov-
inces except Ontario and Quebec and the only force in the Yukon, North-
west, and Nunavut territories. It was founded as the North West Mounted
Police (1873) with a force of 300 men to bring order to western Canada,
where U.S. traders were creating havoc by trading whiskey to the Indi-
ans for furs. That success was followed by peacekeeping in the KLONDIKE
GOLD RUSH (1898) and later settlement of the west. The group assumed its
current name in 1920, when it became a federal force and its headquar-
ters were moved to Ottawa.
Royal Dutch Shell PLC formerly Royal Dutch/Shell Group
Multinational corporation comprising two founding companies, Royal
Dutch Petroleum Co. of The Hague, Neth., and Shell Transport and Trad-
ing Co., PLC, of London, Eng. The two companies began as rivals. In
London in 1878, Marcus Samuel took over his father’s import-export
business (which included Oriental shells) and started selling kerosene; he
later entered the oil business in East Asia, and in 1897 he founded Shell
Transport and Trading Co., Ltd. Meanwhile, in 1890 a group of Dutch
Rozelle, Pete orig. Alvin Ray Rozelle (b. March 1, 1926, South
Ruanda-Urundi
forces over the Rubicon into Italy in 49 BC violated the law that forbade
a general to lead an army out of the province to which he was assigned.
Caesar’s act thus amounted to a declaration of war against the Roman
Senate and resulted in the three-year civil war that left Caesar ruler of the
Roman world. “Crossing the Rubicon” became a popular phrase describ-
ing a step that irrevocably commits a person to a given course of action.
rubidium-strontium
Rudolphi’s rorqual See SEI WHALE
rue family or citrus family
LEMON,
LIME,
ORANGE, GRAPEFRUIT, CITRON, and KUM-
ruminant
Rushdie
1654 I Russell (cid:2) Russian Civil War
Russell (of Kingston Russell), John Russell, 1st Earl (b. Aug.
18, 1792, London, Eng.—d. May 28, 1878, Pembroke Lodge, Richmond
Park, Surrey) British politician and prime minister (1846–52, 1865–66).
A member of the prominent RUSSELL FAMILY, he entered Parliament in 1813.
He was a strong advocate of reform and made it a cause of the WHIG PARTY,
leading the effort to pass the REFORM BILL OF 1832. He served in Viscount
MELBOURNE’s government as home secretary (1835), reducing the number
of crimes liable to capital punishment and beginning state support of pub-
lic education. In the 1840s he advocated free trade and forced ROBERT PEEL
out of office. Russell became prime minister in 1846 and established the
10-hour day in factories (1847) and a board of public health (1848), but
party disunity defeated his attempts at wider social and economic reform.
Russell, Lillian orig. Helen Louise Leonard (b. Dec. 4, 1861,
Russell Cave National Monument National Monument, north-
losopher BERTRAND RUSSELL.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Leaders of Muscovy, Russia, and the Russian Empire
Princes of Muscovy:
Danilovich dynasty*
Daniel (son of
Alexander Nevsky)
Ivan I
Semyon (Simeon)
Ivan II
Dmitry Donskoy
Vasily I
Vasily II
Ivan III
Vasily III
Ivan IV
Czars of Russia:
Danilovich dynasty
Ivan IV
Fyodor I
Czars of Russia:
Time of Troubles
Boris Godunov
Fyodor II
False Dmitry
Vasily (IV)
c.1276–1303
1303–25
1325–40
1340–53
1353–59
1359–89
1389–1425
1425–62
1462–1505
1505–33
1533–47
1547–84
1584–98
1598–1605
1605–6
1606–10
Interregnum
Czars and Empresses
of Russia: Romanov
dynasty**
Michael III
Alexis
Fyodor III
Peter I (Ivan V
coruler 1682–96 )
Catherine I
Peter II
Ivan VI
Elizabeth
Peter III***
Catherine II
Alexander I
Nicholas I
Alexander II
Alexander III
Nicholas II
1610–12
1613–45
1645–76
1676–82
1682–1725
1725–27
1727–30
1730–40
1740–41
1741–61
(O.S.)
1761–62
(O.S.)
1762–96
1796–1801
1801–25
1825–55
1855–81
1881–94
1894–1917
*The Danilovich dynasty is a late branch of the Rurik dynasty, named after
its progenitor, Daniel.
**In 1721 Peter I the Great took the title of “emperor” (Russian: imperator),
considering it a larger, more European title than the Russian “czar.”
However, every male sovereign continued usually to be called czar (and his
consort czarina, or czaritsa), though every female sovereign was conven-
tionally called empress (imperatritsa).
***The direct line of the Romanov dynasty came to an end in 1761 with the
death of Elizabeth, daughter of Peter I, but subsequent rulers of the
“Holstein–Gottorp dynasty” (the first, Peter III, was son of Charles Frederick,
duke of Holstein–Gottorp, and Anna, daughter of Peter I) took the family
name of Romanov.
Russian Formalism (cid:2) Russian Orthodox Church
Russian Formalism See FORMALISM
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
rutabaga
GUCHKOV; JULY DAYS; RUSSIAN CIVIL WAR.
Russian Social-Democratic Workers’ Party Marxist revolu-
tionary party that preceded the COMMUNIST PARTY OF THE SOVIET UNION.
Founded in Minsk in 1898, it held that Russia could achieve socialism
only after developing a bourgeois society with an urban proletariat. The
party split in 1903 because of the argument between the BOLSHEVIK wing,
led by VLADIMIR ILICH LENIN, and the MENSHEVIK wing, led by L. MARTOV, over
Lenin’s proposals for a party composed of professional revolutionaries.
Party members were active in the RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905. In the tur-
moil of the RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1917, the Bolsheviks broke completely
with the Mensheviks and changed their name to “Russian Communist
Party (Bolshevik).”
Russo-Finnish War or Winter War (1939–40) War waged by the
Soviet Union against Finland at the start of WORLD WAR II, following the
signing of the GERMAN-SOVIET NONAGGRESSION PACT. When Finland refused
to grant the Soviets a naval base and other concessions, Soviet troops
attacked on several fronts in November 1939. The heavily outnumbered
Finns under Carl Gustav Emil MANNERHEIM put up a skillful defense until
February 1940, when heavy Russian bombardments breached the Finns’
southern defenses. A peace treaty in March 1940 ceded western Karelia
to Russia and allowed construction of a Soviet naval base on the Hanko
peninsula.
Rutherford of Nelson, Ernest Rutherford, Baron (b. Aug. 30,
Ruthven family
Rybinsk Reservoir
SA in full Sturmabteilung (German: “Assault Division”)
Í) al-hajar See SAIS
Sa-skya pa
U.S. physician and microbiologist. He immigrated to the U.S. with his
parents in 1921 and received an M.D. from New York University. He grew
poliovirus in human nerve tissue outside the body, showed that it does not
enter the body through the respiratory system, and proved that POLIOMY-
ELITIS is primarily an infection of the digestive tract. He postulated that an
oral vaccine would work longer than JONAS SALK’s injections of killed
virus, and he isolated weakened strains of each of the three types of
poliovirus that would stimulate antibody production but not produce dis-
ease. The Sabin oral polio vaccine, approved for use in the U.S. in 1960,
became the main defense against polio throughout the world.
Sabine
den. Her lyrics from those years
combine lean simplicity with imag-
ery variously tender, searing, or mys-
tical. In the famous title poem of her
collection O the Chimneys (1967),
Israel’s body drifts upward as smoke
from the Nazi death camps. Her best-
known play is Eli (1951). She shared
the 1966 Nobel Prize with S.Y.
AGNON.
Sachsen See SAXONY
Sachsenhausen
Sadducee
Íafl al-Dln
source of hydroelectric power; its shores are in many places cliffs 1,000–
1,800 ft (300–550 m) high. Noted for its scenery, it is a recreational area.
Sahara Largest desert in the world, encompassing almost all of north-
ern Africa. Covering an area of about 3,500,000 sq mi (9,065,000 sq km),
it is bounded by the ATLANTIC OCEAN, the ATLAS MOUNTAINS, the MEDITERRA-
NEAN SEA, the RED SEA, and the SAHEL region. It includes portions of sev-
eral countries,
including Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt,
Mauritania, Mali, Niger, Chad, and The Sudan. Principal topographic fea-
tures include large oasis depressions, extensive stony plains, rock-strewn
plateaus, abrupt mountains, sand sheets and dunes, and sand seas. Huge
areas of it are empty, but scattered clusters of inhabitants survive in frag-
ile ecological balance wherever water sources occur. Sedentary living is
restricted to oasis areas. See also LIBYAN DESERT.
Saharan Arab Democratic Republic Disputed territory of WEST-
ERN SAHARA occupied by MOROCCO. It was a Spanish colony from c. 1884
to 1976. After Spain left, native Saharawi guerrillas (see POLISARIO) based
in Algeria declared a government-in-exile and fought Morocco and Mau-
ritania for control. Mauritania made peace in 1979, whereupon Morocco
claimed the whole territory. A referendum on whether the territory will
remain part of Morocco or become independent has been repeatedly post-
poned. See also hASSAN II.
Sahel
merged with St. Salvator’s in 1747), and the University Library (1612).
A third college, St. Mary’s (1537), has always taught theology exclu-
sively. The medical and dental school became independent as the Uni-
versity of Dundee in 1967.
Saint Augustine
three banks. They retreated to Canada, where a pursuing U.S. posse cap-
tured several of them, though the posse was forced to surrender them to
Canadian authorities. The Canadians returned the stolen money but later
released the soldiers, causing strained relations between the two coun-
tries.
Saint Andrews City (pop., 1995 est.: 15,000) and seaport, FIFE coun-
cil area, eastern Scotland. It was formerly the ecclesiastical capital of
Scotland; its religious traditions began in the 6th century AD, when St.
Kenneth is believed to have formed a Celtic religious community there.
It received a charter in 1160 and was one of the principal towns in Scot-
land in the Middle Ages. In 1472 its archbishop was recognized as the
primate of Scotland, and it took part in the important events of the Scot-
tish Reformation. A popular seaside resort, it is noted for its golf courses
and for the University of ST. ANDREWS.
Saint Andrews, University of Oldest university in Scotland,
founded in 1411 on the outskirts of St. Andrews. The university buildings
include St. Salvator’s College (1450), St. Leonard’s College (1512;
it Santa Cruz. In the mid-17th century it was colonized in turn by the
Dutch, English, Spanish, and French. It was purchased by Denmark in
1733 and sold to the U.S. in 1917. In 1989 it was devastated by a hur-
ricane but recovered with U.S. aid. Tourism is the main industry; rum is
distilled and exported.
Saint-Denis
Saint-Just
SAINT LAWRENCE SEAWAY.
Saint Lawrence Seaway U.S.-Canadian waterway and lock system.
Located along the upper ST. LAWRENCE RIVER, it links the Atlantic Ocean
with the GREAT LAKES. Its construction, carried out in 1954–59, involved
clearing a 186-mi (299-km) stretch of the St. Lawrence River between
MONTREAL and Lake ONTARIO. It included lakes, rivers, locks, and canals
that extended for 2,340 mi (3,766 km) to connect Duluth, Minn., with the
head of the Gulf of ST. LAWRENCE. With the Great Lakes, it provides 9,500
mi (15,285 km) of navigable waterways. It allows deep-draft ocean ves-
sels access to the Great Lakes’ rich industrial and agricultural regions. It
is navigable from April to mid-December.
Saint-Léon
Saint Petersburg Russian Sankt-Peterburg
The original inhabitants, the CARIBs, recog-
nized British sovereignty but revolted in
1795. Most of the Caribs were deported;
many who remained were killed in volcanic
eruptions in 1812 and 1902. In 1969 Saint
Vincent became a self-governing state in association with the United King-
dom, and in 1979 it achieved full independence.
Sainte-Beuve
Sakyamuni
lower level. See also INCOME TAX; PROGRESSIVE TAX.
Salesbury
SALT See STRATETIC ARMS LIMITATION TALKS
Saltillo
Salyut
Samoa, American See AMERICAN SAMOA
Samory in full Samory Touré
includes MOUNT WILSON OBSERVATOR Y, northeast of PASADENA. The moun-
tains are largely within the Angeles National Forest.
San Jacinto
San Martín
Sancho IV known as Sancho the Brave (b. 1257—d. April 25, 1295,
Toledo, Castile) King of Castile and Leon (1284–95). The second son of
Afonso X, he won the backing of nobles and military orders in his effort
to gain recognition as heir, and he usurped the throne on his father’s death.
Sancho defeated an invasion of Andalusia by the king of Fès (1290) and
won the support of Aragon by marrying his son to the daughter of JAMES
II. He depended greatly on his warrior-queen, María de Molina (d. 1321).
sand Mineral, rock, or soil particles that are 0.0008–0.08 in. (0.02–2
mm) in diameter. Most rock-forming minerals are found in sand, but
QUARTZ is by far the most common. Most sands also contain a small quan-
tity of FELDSPAR, as well as white MICA. All sands contain small quantities
of heavy rock-forming minerals, including garnet, tourmaline, zircon,
rutile, topaz, pyroxenes, and amphiboles. In the pottery and glassmaking
industries very pure quartz sands are used as a source of silica. Similar
sands are used for lining the hearths of steel furnaces. Molds used in
foundries for casting metal are made of sand with a clay binder. Quartz
and garnet sands are used extensively as abrasives. Among ordinary
sand’s many uses, it is a basic ingredient of mortar, cement, and concrete.
See also TAR SAND.
Sand,
Sangallo the Younger, Antonio da See Antonio DA SANGALLO THE
YOUNGER
Sanger, Frederick (b. Aug. 13, 1918, Rendcombe, Gloucestershire,
Eng.) British biochemist. Educated at the University of Cambridge, he
thereafter worked principally at the Medical Research Council in Cam-
bridge (1951–83). He spent 10 years elucidating the structure of the insu-
lin molecule, determining the exact order of all its amino acids by 1955.
His techniques for determining the order in which amino acids are linked
in proteins made it possible to discover the structure of many other com-
plex proteins. In 1958 he won a Nobel Prize for his work. In 1980 Sanger
became the fourth person ever to be awarded a second Nobel Prize, which
he shared with PAUL BERG and Walter Gilbert (b. 1932), for determining the
sequences of nucleotides in the DNA molecule of a small virus.
Sanger, Margaret orig. Margaret Higgins (b. Sept. 14, 1879,
sangha
yardage. He holds records for the most games with 150 yd or more rush-
ing (25), the most 100-yd games in a season (14), and the most touch-
down runs of 50 or more yards (15). A runner with exceptional speed and
balance, Sanders was known for his array of jukes and spins that left
defenders grasping at air.
Sanders, Otto Liman von See Otto LIMAN VON SANDERS
sandstone
Sandwich, John Montagu, 4th earl of (b. Nov. 13, 1718—d.
ering of an urban culture and a commercial economy and encouraged
improvements to roads and communications.
sannyasi
Santa Isabel See MALABO
Santander
São Paulo
mercial centre, with Otaru, on the Sea of JAPAN (East Sea), as its port.
Chief industries are lumbering, printing, and publishing. A popular cen-
tre for skiing and winter sports, it was the site of the 1972 Winter OLYM-
PIC GAMES. The annual Snow Festival features giant sculptures carved from
packed snow. It is the site of two universities.
sapsucker Either of two species of North American WOODPECKERS that
drill holes in neat, close rows to
obtain sap and insects. The yellow-
bellied sapsucker (Sphyrapicus var-
ius), about 8 in. (20 cm) long, is one
the few migratory species of
woodpecker, breeding in northern
regions and southern mountains and
migrating as far as the West Indies
and Central America. Both sexes
have bold head markings. William-
son’s
sapsucker
thyroideus),
which lives in high pine forests of
the western U.S.,
is uncommon
throughout its range.
Íaqq)rah
Sakkara
Sardinia Italian Sardegna
Saro-Wiwa
S)s)nian dynasty or S)ss)nian
Satnami sect
Sa!)d
saurischian
Savonarola
Sax, Adolphe orig. Antoine-Joseph Sax (b. Nov. 6, 1814,
Saxe, (Hermann-) Maurice, count de (b. Oct. 28, 1696, Goslar,
Saxony—d. Nov. 30, 1750, Chambord, France) German-born French gen-
eral. The illegitimate son of Frederick Augustus I of Saxony, he served
under EUGENE OF SAVOY in Flanders and was made count of Saxony (Saxe)
in 1711. He commanded a German regiment in the French service (1719)
and made innovations in military training, especially in musketry. He
served with distinction in the French army against his half brother AUGUS-
TUS III in the War of the POLISH SUCCESSION and was made a general (1734).
He successfully led French forces in the War of the AUSTRIAN SUCCESSION,
capturing Prague (1741) and invading the Austrian Netherlands. There he
won the Battle of Fontenoy (1745) and captured Brussels and Antwerp
(1746). Appointed marshal general of France by LOUIS XV, Saxe led the
successful invasion of Holland in 1747.
Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, House of See House of WINDSOR
saxifrage
Sazonov
TIC SURGER Y.
scarab
ground. See also RAYLEIGH SCATTERING.
Schacht
scherzo
schizophrenia
Schleswig-Holstein
schnauzer
Schopenhauer
Schumacher
Schuyler
leper colony. In 1952 he received the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts on
behalf of “the Brotherhood of Nations.” Two years before his death, his
hospital and leper colony were serving 500 patients. His philosophical
books discuss his famous principle of “reverence for life.”
Schwitters
scirocco See SIROCCO
scissors Cutting instrument or tool consisting of a pair of opposed metal
blades that meet and cut when the handles at their ends are brought
together. Modern scissors are of two types: the more usual pivoted blades
have a rivet or screw connection between the cutting ends and the handle
ends; spring shears have a C-shaped spring connection at the handle ends.
SCLC See SOUTHERN CHRISTIAN LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE
scleroderma
1706 I
Scotland (cid:2) Scott
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Scott, Sir Walter, 1st Baronet (b. Aug. 15, 1771, Edinburgh,
JONATHAN SWIFT, 19 vol.
Sir Walter Scott, detail of an oil paint-
ing by Sir Edwin Henry Landseer,
1824; in the National Portrait Gallery,
London
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY,
LONDON
Scriabin
Scotts Bluff National Monument National monument, western
Nebraska, U.S. Established in 1919, it has an area of 5 sq mi (13 sq km).
Its focus is a large bluff that rises 800 ft (244 m) above the NORTH PLATTE
RIVER and was a prominent landmark on the OREGON TRAIL. A museum at
the base of the bluff highlights the history of the pioneer travelers.
Scottsboro case U.S. civil-rights controversy. In April 1931, in Scotts-
boro, Ala., nine African American youths were charged with the rape of
two white women. Despite testimony by doctors that no rape had
occurred, the all-white jury convicted them and sentenced all but the
youngest to death. In 1932, following public outcry, the U.S. Supreme
Court overturned the convictions on the grounds that the defendants had
not received adequate legal counsel. Alabama retried and convicted one
of the youths; this conviction too was overturned by the Supreme Court
on the grounds that African Americans had been systematically excluded
from the state’s juries. Alabama retried and reconvicted the defendants
individually, but the state yielded to public pressure and freed or paroled
all but one, who later escaped.
Scotus, John Duns See John DUNS SCOTUS
scouting Activities of various national and worldwide organizations for
youth aimed at developing character, citizenship, and individual skills.
Scouting began when ROBERT S. BADEN-POWELL published Scouting for Boys
(1908), in which he described the games and contests he used to train
cavalry troops in scouting, envisioning small groups of boys who would
learn tracking, reconnaissance, mapping, and other outdoor skills under a
peer leader. The Boy Scouts, as established by Baden-Powell, was for
boys 11–15 years old. The concept became so popular that separate orga-
nizations for girls (Girl Guides, or Girl Scouts, 1910) and for younger
boys (Wolf Cubs, or Cub Scouts, 1916) and older boys (Explorers) were
also formed.
Scrabble Game in which two to four players compete in forming words
with lettered wooden tiles on a 225-square board. Words spelled out by
letters on the tiles interlock like words in a crossword puzzle. Words are
Scribe
Scythian art
extruded to scrape algae and other
food from rocks. Some species exca-
vate hiding places in coral, rock, or
even steel. Roe of some species is
eaten in certain countries.
Seaborg
sea parrot See PUFFIN
sea scorpion See SCULPIN
ELEPHANT SEAL, HARBOUR SEAL, HARP SEAL, and LEOPARD SEAL. The eared seals (family
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Sealyham terrier (cid:2) season
The primary cause of Earth’s seasons is the change in the amount of sunlight reach-
ing the surface at various latitudes over the course of a year. Because Earth is tilted
on its axis with respect to the plane of its orbit around the Sun, different parts of its
surface are in direct (overhead) sunlight at different times of the year.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
begins on the winter SOLSTICE, December 21 or 22; spring on the vernal
EQUINOX, March 20 or 21; summer on the summer solstice, June 21 or 22;
and fall (autumn) on the autumnal equinox, September 22 or 23. In the
Southern Hemisphere, the dates of onset of summer and winter are
reversed, as are those of spring and fall.
seasonal affective disorder (SAD) Cyclical DEPRESSION occurring
Seastrom, Victor See Victor SJÖSTRÖM
SEATO See SOUTHEAST ASIA TREATY ORGANIZATION
sebaceous gland
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) U.S. regulatory
NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE, the LONDON STOCK EXCHANGE, and the TOKYO
Security Council, United Nations See UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL
Sedan
to increased opposition to the government. In 1870 a new constitution
establishing a quasi-parliamentary regime was widely approved, but
France’s defeat at the Battle of SEDAN in the FRANCO-PRUSSIAN WAR was
followed by an uprising in Paris on Sept. 4, 1870. This resulted in the
overthrow of the government, the abdication of Napoleon III, and the end
of the Second Empire.
Second Empire style See BEAUX-ARTS STYLE
Second International or Socialist International (1889–1914)
sedimentary facies
Sefer ha-zohar
seismic sea wave See TSUNAMI
seismic
the last, the empire was at its height. Resistance to the power and spread
of Hellenistic culture soon began to manifest itself in the Asian lands.
Antiochus III’s encounter with the Romans signaled decline, especially
after the defeat of 190. The decline accelerated after the death of Antio-
chus IV (r. 175–164), who lost JUDAEA to the MACCABEES. The efforts of
Demetrius I and Antiochus VII could not forestall the dynasty’s inevi-
table end at the hands of the Roman POMPEY THE GREAT in 64 BC.
Seleucus I Nicator
Sellers, Peter orig. Richard Henry Sellers (b. Sept. 8, 1925,
Selye
Seminole
increased the number of senators to 900. AUGUSTUS dropped the number
to 300 and reduced the Senate’s power, while giving it new judicial and
legislative functions. The number later increased to about 2,000; many
were provincials, the most important being the great landowners. The
Senate’s power faded until it disappeared from the historical record in the
6th century AD.
Sendak, Maurice (Bernard) (b. June 10, 1928, New York, N.Y.,
U.S.) U.S. artist and writer. Sendak studied at the Art Students League.
He illustrated more than 80 children’s books by other writers before writ-
ing one himself. His Kenny’s Window (1956) was followed by the inno-
vative trilogy Where the Wild Things Are (1963), In the Night Kitchen
(1970), and Outside over There (1981). He collaborated with Carole King
on the musical Really Rosie (1978) and designed stage productions of The
Magic Flute (1980) and The Nutcracker (1983).
Sendero Luminoso See SHINING PATH
Seneca
Sennacherib
embowelment was favoured because it was slow and painful and therefore
demonstrated courage, self-control, and strong resolve. Voluntary seppuku
was performed to avoid the dishonour of capture, show loyalty to one’s
lord by following him into death, protest against some policy of a supe-
rior, or atone for failure. Obligatory seppuku was a method of capital
punishment for a samurai, who would be beheaded by a second once he
had made an initial stab wound himself. Obligatory seppuku was abol-
ished in 1873, but voluntary seppuku continued to occur. Notable 20th-
century examples included those of army officer NOGI MARESUKE and writer
septicemia
(1918–41) and communist Yugoslavia (1945–91). With the independence
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1992, a Bosnian form of the language was
recognized of necessity. Vocabulary and pronunciation differences exist
among the three but form no real barrier to communication. The Croats
and Bosnians use the Roman, or Latin, alphabet; the Serbs and Montene-
grins of present-day Serbia and Montenegro use Cyrillic. Most Bosnians,
Serbs, and Croats insist that their language is distinct from the others,
and, perhaps, from a political perspective this is understandable; but most
linguists consider Serbian, Croatian, and Bosnian a single language,
which has historically been called Serbo-Croatian.
Serbs, Croats
and Montenegro is mountainous, with the
Dinaric Alps in the west and the BALKAN
MOUNTAINS in the east. Rivers include the
DANUBE, Ibar, MORAVA, TIMIÊ, and TISZA. The
country has oil, gas, coal, copper, lead, zinc,
and gold deposits. Its industries include machine building, metallurgy,
mining, electronics, and petroleum products, while its agricultural products
include corn, wheat, potatoes, and fruit. The country is a federation with a
president and a unicameral legislature, but most power resides with the
governments of the two republics. The Kingdom of SERBS, CROATS, AND SLOV-
ENES was created after the collapse of AUSTRIA-HUNGAR Y at the end of World
War I. The country signed treaties with Czechoslovakia and Romania in
1920–21, marking the beginning of the LITTLE ENTENTE. In 1929 an absolute
monarchy was established, the country’s name was changed to Yugoslavia,
and it was divided without regard to ethnic boundaries. Axis powers
invaded Yugoslavia in 1941, and German, Italian, Hungarian, and Bulgar-
ian troops occupied it for the rest of World War II. In 1945 the Federal Peo-
ple’s Republic of Yugoslavia was established; it included the republics of
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA, CROATIA, MACEDONIA, Montenegro, Serbia, and SLO-
synonymous, are often used interchangeably. The serial method was
worked out by ARNOLD SCHOENBERG in the years 1916–23, though another
serial method was being devised simultaneously by Josef Matthias Hauer.
To Schoenberg, it represented the culmination of the growth of CHROMATI-
CISM in the late 19th and early 20th century. In an attempt to erase the
system of TONALITY, which he regarded as outworn but which frequently
asserted itself even in the music of composers who desired to transcend
it, Schoenberg’s original method stipulated (among several other require-
ments) that no note could be repeated before all 11 other notes of the
chromatic scale had been used. Serialism, a broader term than 12-tone
music, can be applied to the use of fewer than 12 tones. “Total serialism,”
a concept that arose in the late 1940s, attempts to organize not only the
12 pitches but also other elements such as rhythm, dynamics, register, and
instrumentation into ordered sets.
serigraphy See SILKSCREEN
serine
MENT.
logic and NUMBER THEOR Y.
SETI in full search for extraterrestrial intelligence Ongoing
also DRAKE EQUATION.
Seton
Seton
Seventh-day Adventist See ADVENTIST
Severn
Sewall
SEXUALISM.
sexually transmitted disease (STD) Disease transmitted prima-
rily by direct sexual contact. STDs usually affect the REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
and URINAR Y system but can be spread to the mouth or rectum by oral or
anal sex. In later stages they may attack other organs and systems. The
best-known are SYPHILIS, GONORRHEA, AIDS, and HERPES SIMPLEX. Yeast infec-
tions (see CANDIDA) produce a thick, whitish vaginal discharge and genital
irritation and itch in women and sometimes irritation of the penis in men.
Crab louse infestation (see LOUSE, HUMAN) can also be considered an STD.
The incidence of STDs has been affected by such factors as ANTIBIOTICs,
BIRTH-CONTROL methods, and changes in sexual behaviour. See also CHLAMY-
DIA; HEPATITIS; PELVIC INFLAMMATOR Y DISEASE; WART.
Seybouse River
SGML in full Standard Generalized Markup Language
Shaanxi
Shah Jah)n
shakuhachi
Shankara
sharksucker See REMORA
Sharm al-Sheikh See Cape NAÍR0Nq
Sharon
Shawnee
DOG, SHETLAND SHEEPDOG.
sheikh
sheltie See SHETLAND SHEEPDOG
Shen-hsi See SHAANXI
sheng
1738 I
Sheridan (cid:2) Shetland Islands
joined ULYSSES S. GRANT to help secure Union victories in the PETERSBURG
CAMPAIGN. After the war he became general of the army (1883).
Sheridan, Richard Brinsley (Butler) (baptized Nov. 4, 1751, Dub-
the SHERMAN ANTITRUST ACT and the
Sherman, Roger (b. April 19,
John Sherman
1721, Newton, Mass.—d. July 23,
1793, New Haven, Conn., U.S.)
American jurist and politician. Active in trade and law in Connecticut, he
served as judge of the superior court (1766–85) and mayor of New Haven
(1784–93). A delegate to the Continental Congress, he signed the DECLA-
COURTESY OF THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, WASHINGTON,
RATION OF INDEPENDENCE and helped draft the ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION. At
the CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION, he proposed a compromise on congres-
sional representation that combined facets of the two opposing plans by
the large and small states. The result, called the Connecticut (or Great)
Compromise, which was incorporated into the Constitution, provided for
a bicameral legislature with representation based on population in one
house (House of Representatives) and on the principle of equality in the
other (Senate).
Sherman, William Tecumseh (b. Feb. 8, 1820, Lancaster, Ohio,
U.S.—d. Feb. 14, 1891, New York, N.Y.) U.S. army general. A brother
of JOHN SHERMAN, he graduated from West Point, served in Florida and
California, then resigned his commission in 1853 to pursue a banking
career. He rejoined the Union army when the American Civil War broke
out. He fought in the Battle of Bull Run, then served under ULYSSES S.
GRANT at Shiloh and was promoted to major general. With Grant he helped
win the VICKSBURG CAMPAIGN and the Battle of CHATTANOOGA. As commander
of the division of the Mississippi, he assembled 100,000 troops for the
invasion of Georgia (1864). After engagements with Confederate troops
under JOSEPH JOHNSTON, he captured and burned Atlanta and began his
devastating March to the Sea to capture Savannah, leaving a trail of near-
total destruction. In 1865 he marched north, destroying Confederate rail-
roads and sources of supply in North and South Carolina. He accepted the
surrender of Johnston’s army on April 26. Promoted to general, he suc-
ceeded Grant as commander of the army (1869–84). Often credited with
the saying “War is hell,” he was a major architect of modern TOTAL WAR.
Sherman Antitrust Act (1890) First U.S. legislation enacted to curb
concentrations of power that restrict trade and reduce economic compe-
tition. Proposed by Sen. JOHN SHERMAN, it made illegal all attempts to
monopolize any part of trade or commerce in the U.S. Initially used
against trade unions, it was more widely enforced under Pres. THEODORE
ROOSEVELT. In 1914 Congress strengthened the act with the Clayton Anti-
trust Act and the formation of the Federal Trade Commission. In 1920 the
U.S. Supreme Court relaxed antitrust regulations so that only “unreason-
able” restraint of trade through acquisitions, mergers, and predatory pric-
ing constituted a violation. Later cases reinforced the prohibition against
MONOPOLY control, including the 1984 break-up of AT&T. See also ANTITRUST
Sherpa Any member of a mountain-dwelling people of Nepal and of
Sikkim state, India. Sherpas are of Tibetan culture and descent and speak
a Tibetan dialect. They make a living spinning and weaving wool, along
with farming and cattle breeding. They have won international renown as
porters in the high Himalayas. They number about 120,000.
Sherrington, Sir Charles Scott (b. Nov. 27, 1857, London,
Shetland Islands or Zetland Islands Island group (pop., 2001:
21,988), Scotland. The Shetlands comprise some 100 islands located 130
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Shevardnadze
Historically, they were united in a single tribal state headed by a divine
king whose physical and ritual well-being was held to ensure the state’s
prosperity. In addition to several classes of royalty, the Shilluk tradition-
ally were divided into royal retainers, commoners, and slaves. See also
NILOT.
Shiloh
Shlr)z
BRIG, CLIPPER SHIP, CORVETTE, DHOW, FRIGATE, JUNK, LONGSHIP, OCEAN LINER, SCHOO-
NER, YACHT.
powered BATTLESHIP.
mythology. He is both the destroyer and the restorer, the great ascetic and
the symbol of sensuality, the benevolent herdsman of souls and the wrath-
ful avenger. His female consort is known under various manifestations,
including PARVATI, DURGA, and KALI. InS HAIVISM he is worshiped as the para-
mount lord.
Shivaji
sh§ji
probably acquired horses by 1680 and adopted much of PLAINS INDIAN cul-
ture; they hunted buffalo, used TEPEEs and skin clothing, and warred with
other tribes. The Shoshone are closely related to the Ute, Paiute, Gosiute,
and Bannock. After splitting from the Wind River group, the COMANCHE
moved south. The Shoshone number about 10,000.
Shoshone
Shrewsbury, Charles Talbot, duke and 12th earl of (b. July
FAIR Y SHRIMP.
Shropshire
Shugen-d§
include NOVOSIBIRSK, OMSK, KRASNOYARSK, and IRKUTSK.
Siberut
She acted with her father’s traveling company and married actor William
Siddons in 1773. Her performance as Isabella in Fatal Marriage at the
DRUR Y LANE THEATRE in 1782 was highly successful; she was instantly
acclaimed as the leading tragedienne of the time. Siddons played Shakes-
pearean parts, notably Lady Macbeth, from 1785 until she retired in 1812.
She was the subject of well-known portraits by THOMAS GAINSBOROUGH and
JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
Siena
Sigismund
sikhara or shikhara
including QUARTZ, tridymite, cristobalite, coesite, stishovite, melanophlog-
ite, lechatelierite, and chalcedony. Various kinds of silica minerals have
been produced synthetically.
silicate mineral Any of a large group of silicon-oxygen compounds
that are widely distributed throughout much of the solar system. The sili-
cates make up about 95% of the Earth’s crust and upper mantle, occur-
ring as the major constituents of most IGNEOUS ROCKs and in appreciable
quantities in SEDIMENTAR Y and METAMORPHIC rocks. They also are important
constituents of lunar samples, meteorites, and most asteroids. In addition,
planetary probes have detected them on the surfaces of Mercury, Venus,
and Mars. Of the approximately 600 known silicate minerals, only the
FELDSPARs, AMPHIBOLEs, PYROXENEs, MICAs, OLIVINEs, FELDSPATHOIDs, and ZEOLITEs are
siliceous rock
Sillanpää
BIMETALLISM.
Silvers, Phil orig. Philip Silversmith (b. May 11, 1912, Brooklyn,
GEORGIAN BAY and Lake ONTARIO
north of TORONTO, Lake Simcoe is
287 sq mi (743 sq km) in area.
Numerous small streams and the
Trent Canal feed the lake, which is
30 mi (48 km) long and contains sev-
eral islands; the largest, Georgina, is
an Indian reserve. The lake is a popu-
lar summer vacation area.
Simenon
comprising The Grass (1958), The Flanders Road (1960), The Palace
(1962), and History (1967), with its recurring characters and events. His
other novels include The Wind (1957), Triptych (1973), The Acacia (1989),
and The Trolley (2001). He received the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1985.
Simon
simulation, computer Use of a computer-generated system to rep-
resent the dynamic responses and behaviour of a real or proposed system.
A mathematical description of a system is developed as a computer pro-
gram that uses equations to represent the functional relationships within
the system. When the program is run, the resulting mathematical dynam-
ics form an analog, usually represented graphically, of the behaviour of
the modeled system. Variables in the program can be adjusted to simu-
late varying conditions in the system. Computer simulations are used to
study the behaviour of objects or systems that cannot be easily or safely
tested in real life, such as weather patterns or a nuclear blast. Simpler
simulations performed by PERSONAL COMPUTERs are business models and geo-
metric models. See also SCIENTIFIC VISUALIZATION.
simultaneous equations See SYSTEM OF EQUATIONS
controlled by investor James Henry Ting. Still one of the world’s largest
sewing-machine manufacturers,
the company declared bankruptcy in
1999 and was reorganized as Singer NV in 2000.
Singitic
Singer, Isaac Bashevis Yiddish Yitskhok Bashevis Zinger (b.
POLO BRIDGE INCIDENT; NANJING MASSACRE; TONGHAK UPRISING.
Sino-Tibetan
Siqueiros
sitar
Sjahrir
53) and television (1951–71). Noted for his broad humour and warm per-
sonality, Skelton developed characters such as the Mean Widdle Kid,
Clem Kadiddlehopper, and Freddie the Freeloader.
skene
Skelton, Red orig. Richard Bernard Skelton (b. July 18, 1913,
species are 26 in. (66 cm) long, but most are under 8 in. (20 cm). Some
have small or no limbs and sunken eardrums. Most are ground-dwellers
or burrowers; some are arboreal or semiaquatic. Skinks eat insects and
other small invertebrates; large species are herbivorous. Some species lay
eggs; others bear live young.
Skopje
known is KAPOSI SARCOMA.
1764 I
skull (cid:2) slag
other birds to disgorge food; they nest near penguins, petrels, murres, and
terns, stealing their eggs and young. They also eat lemmings and carrion.
skull Skeletal framework of the head. With the exception of the lower
JAW, its bones meet in immovable joints (sutures) to form a unit that
encloses and protects the BRAIN and SENSE organs and gives shape to the
FACE. The cranium, the upper part enclosing the brain, comprising the
frontal, parietal, occipital, temporal, sphenoid, and ethmoid bones, is
globular and relatively large compared to the facial portion. Its base has
an opening through which the SPINAL CORD connects to the brain. The skull
sits on the top vertebra (atlas), which permits back-and-forth motion. For
side-to-side motion, the atlas turns on the next vertebra (axis). See also
CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS, FONTANEL.
Front and side views of the human skull.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
E.R. DEGGINGER
Striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis).
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Seven-man freefall hookup.
GUY SAUVAGE—AGENCE VANDYSTADT/PHOTO RESEARCHERS
slalom
were traded in the Caribbean for molasses, which was made into rum in
the American colonies and traded back to Africa for more slaves.
slavery Forced labour for little or no pay under the threat of violence.
Slavery has existed on nearly every continent, including Asia, Europe,
Africa, and the Americas, and throughout most of recorded history. The
ancient Greeks and Romans accepted the institution of slavery, as did the
Mayas, Incas, Aztecs, and Chinese. Until European involvement in the
trade, however, slavery was a private and domestic institution. Beginning
in the 16th century, a more public and “racially” based type of slavery
was established when Europeans began importing slaves from Africa to
the New World (see SLAVE TRADE). An estimated 11 million people were
taken from Africa during the transatlantic slave trade. By the mid-19th
century the slave population in the U.S. had risen to more than four mil-
lion, although slave imports had been banned from 1809. Most of the
Africans sent to the United States worked on cotton or rice plantations in
the South, their status governed by SLAVE CODES. Almost 40 percent of cap-
tives transported from Africa to the Americas were taken to Brazil, where
harsh conditions required the constant replenishing of slaves. Following
the rise of ABOLITIONISM, Britain outlawed slavery in its colonies in 1833,
and France did the same in 1848. During the American Civil War, slavery
was abolished in the Confederacy by the EMANCIPATION PROCLAMATION
(1863), which was decreed by Pres. Abraham Lincoln. Brazil was the last
to abolish slavery, doing so in 1888. Official policy notwithstanding, sla-
very continues to exist in many parts of the world. Many contemporary
slaves are women and children forced into prostitution or working at hard
labour or in sweatshops. Debt bondage is common, affecting millions of
people, and slaves are often traded for material goods. See also DRED SCOTT
DECISION; FUGITIVE SLAVE ACTS; SERFDOM; UNDERGROUND RAILROAD.
Slavic
Slovak
Sloan, Alfred P(ritchard), Jr.
Slovaks settled there around the 6th century. It became part of Great
MORAVIA in the 9th century but was conquered by the MAGYARS c. 907. It
remained in the kingdom of Hungary until the end of World War I, when
the Slovaks joined the Czechs to form the new state of Czechoslovakia
in 1918. In 1938 Slovakia was declared an autonomous unit within
Czechoslovakia; it was nominally independent under German protection
from 1939 to 1945. After the expulsion of the Germans, Slovakia joined
a reconstituted Czechoslovakia, which came under Soviet domination in
1948. The fall of the communist regime in 1989 led to a revival of inter-
est in autonomy, and Slovakia became an independent nation in 1993. It
joined both NATO and the European Union in 2004.
Slovene
ods outside the body (e.g., in bedding). EDWARD JENNER developed a VACCINE
from cowpox. The World Health Organization’s eradication project
reduced smallpox deaths from two million in 1967 to zero in 1977–80.
The virus now exists only in laboratories; in some countries it may be
under development for purposes of BIOLOGICAL WARFARE.
Smalls, Robert (b. April 5, 1839, Beaufort, S.C., U.S.—d. Feb. 22,
1915, Beaufort) U.S. naval hero.
Born to plantation slaves, he was
taken to Charleston, S.C., where he
worked as a hotel waiter. In the
American Civil War
he was
impressed into the Confederate navy
to serve on the armed frigate Planter.
In 1862 he and 12 other slaves seized
control of the ship in Charleston har-
bour and turned it over to the Union
navy. He served as the ship’s pilot
and became its captain in 1863. After
the war he served in the U.S. House
of Representatives (1875–79, 1881–
also METALLURGY; MINERAL PROCESSING.
Smetana
Smallwood,
Joseph Roberts Smallwood
orig.
1770 I
Smith, Bessie (cid:2) Smith, Joseph
Smith, Frederick Edwin See Earl of BIRKENHEAD
the BRONTË SISTERS, CHARLES DARWIN, WILLIAM THACKERAY, ELIZABETH BARRETT
BROWNING, WILKIE COLLINS, MATTHEW ARNOLD, HARRIET MARTINEAU, and
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Joseph Smith, detail from an oil paint-
ing by an unknown artist; in the Com-
munity of Christ Temple and
Auditorium complex, Independence,
Missouri.
John Smith, engraving by Simon van
de Passe, 1616
COURTESY OF THE TRUSTEES OF THE BRITISH MUSEUM;
PHOTOGRAPH, J.R. FREEMAN & CO. LTD.
COURTESY OF THE COMMUNITY OF CHRIST,
INDEPENDENCE, MISSOURI
Smith, Kate orig. Kathryn Elizabeth Smith (b. May 1, 1909,
Greenville, Va., U.S.—d. June 17, 1986, Raleigh, N.C.) U.S. singer, long
known as the “First Lady of Radio.” Smith studied nursing before mov-
ing to New York City, where she won a Broadway role as an overweight
girl who was the butt of jokes. In 1931 she began her immensely popular
radio show Kate Smith Sings, which ran for 16 years; her theme song,
“When the Moon Comes over the Mountain,” became familiar to mil-
lions. In 1938 she created the news and gossip program Kate Smith Speaks
and introduced IRVING BERLIN’s song “God Bless America.” She hosted sev-
eral television shows in the 1950s. In 1982 she was awarded the U.S.
Medal of Freedom.
Smith, Dame Maggie orig. Margaret Natalie Smith (b. Dec.
Smith, Margaret Chase orig. Margaret Madeline Chase (b.
Smith, Red orig. Walter Wellesley Smith (b. Sept. 25, 1905,
Smith, Stevie orig. Florence Margaret Smith (b. Sept. 20, 1902,
Smith, Kate (cid:2) smithing
WEST PASSAGE.
smithing Fabrication and repair of metal objects by hot and cold FORG-
ING on an ANVIL or with a power hammer or by WELDING and other means.
Blacksmiths traditionally worked with IRON (anciently known as “black
metal”), making agricultural and other tools, fashioning hardware (e.g.,
hooks, hinges, handles) for the farm, the home, and industry, and shoe-
ing horses. The term smithing is also applied to work with precious met-
als (gold, silver) as well as other metals (e.g., tin, including tinplate, and
steel).
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Smithsonian Institution U.S. research institution. Enabled by the
bequest of the English chemist James Smithson (1765–1829), it was estab-
lished in Washington, D.C., by an 1846 act of Congress. The Smithsonian
administers numerous bureaus, including the Freer Gallery of Art, the
John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, the National Air and
Space Museum, the National Gallery of Art, the National Museum of
History and Technology, the National Museum of Natural History, the
National Zoological Park, and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observa-
tory.
smog Polluted air over a community. The term, a combination of
“smoke” and “fog,” was popularized in the early 20th century and now
commonly refers to the pall of automotive or industrial origin that lies
over many cities. Sulfurous smog results from the use of sulfur-bearing
fossil fuels, particularly coal, and is aggravated by dampness. Photo-
chemical smog requires neither smoke nor fog. Nitrogen oxides and
hydrocarbon vapours emitted from automobiles and other sources undergo
reactions in the presence of sunlight that produce a light brownish col-
oration of the atmosphere, reduced visibility, plant damage, irritation of
the eyes, and respiratory distress.
smoking Breathing the fumes of burning plant material, especially
tobacco, from a cigarette, cigar, or pipe. Despite social and medical argu-
ments against tobacco use, smoking is widely practiced around the world.
NICOTINE is an ALKALOID in tobacco that is addictive and can have both
stimulating and tranquilizing psychoactive effects. The tar (residue) and
gases produced by burning tobacco have many negative health effects.
They include LUNG CANCER, PANCREATIC CANCER, and LAR YNGEAL CANCER; HEART
DISEASE and STROKE; and EMPHYSEMA and chronic BRONCHITIS. Smoking also
increases other health-related risk factors (see ASBESTOSIS). A nonsmoker
who breathes secondhand smoke (such as the smoke from a lit cigarette)
is at an increased risk of the same diseases that affect smokers. Second-
hand smoke also increases the risk of SUDDEN INFANT DEATH SYNDROME. Doctor-
run programs, along with nicotine patches and gums that provide
diminishing doses of nicotine, are among the aids available to help those
who wish to quit smoking. Hypnosis, acupuncture, herbal remedies, and
other approaches are also widely advertised as ways to quit smoking.
Smoking has been greatly reduced in the health-conscious West even as
it rises in many less-developed countries.
Smoky Mountains See GREAT SMOKY MTNS.
smoky quartz Common, coarse-grained variety of QUARTZ that ranges
in colour from nearly black through smoky brown. No distinct boundary
exists between smoky and colourless quartz. Its abundance causes it to be
worth considerably less than either AMETHYST or CITRINE. Heating bleaches
the stone, the colour sometimes passing through yellow; these yellow
pieces are often sold as citrine.
Smolensk
Smythe
Snorri Sturluson
Sobat
snowshoe hare or snowshoe rabbit or varying hare North-
Snyder, Gary (Sherman) (b.
1776 I
Social Gospel (cid:2) socialism
Germany under OTTO VON BISMARCK: HEALTH INSURANCE in 1883, WORKERS’
INSURANCE; WELFARE.
include CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY, ECONOMICS, POLITICAL SCIENCE, SOCIOLOGY, CRIMI-
NOLOGY, and SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY. Comparative law and comparative religion
(the comparative study of the legal systems and religions of different
nations and cultures) are also sometimes regarded as social sciences.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
also SOCIAL SECURITY ACT; UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE; WELFARE; WORKERS’ COMPEN-
SATION.
Social War or Italic War or Marsic War (90–89 BC) Rebellion
waged by ancient Rome’s Italian allies (Latin, socii). The allies in cen-
tral and southern Italy had aided Rome in its wars, but they were denied
the privileges of Roman citizenship. The people of central Italy’s hills—
the Marsi in the north and the Samnites in the south—organized a con-
federacy and began an uprising for independence, winning victories over
Roman armies in the north and south. After Rome granted citizenship to
those who had not revolted and those who would immediately lay down
their arms, Italian interest in the struggle declined. SULLA defeated the
weakened rebels in the south, and legislation was passed to unify Italy
south of the Po River.
social welfare See WELFARE
TARIANISM, SOCIAL DEMOCRACY.
Socialist International See SECOND INTERNATIONAL
Socialist Realism Officially sanctioned theory and method of artistic
and literary composition in the Soviet Union from 1932 to the mid-1980s.
Following the tradition of 19th-century Russian REALISM, Socialist Realism
purported to serve as an objective mirror of life. Instead of critiquing
society, however, it took as its primary theme the struggle to build social-
ism and a classless society and called for the didactic use of art to develop
social consciousness. Artists were expected to take a positive view of
socialist society and to keep in mind its historical relevance, requisites
that seldom coincided with their real experiences and frequently under-
mined the artistic credibility of their works.
Socialist Revolutionary Party (SR) Russian political party. The
ideological heir to the 19th-century NARODNIKs (Populists), it was founded
in 1901 by agrarian socialists and appealed mainly to the peasantry. It
was the principal alternative to the RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC WORKERS’
PARTY in the early 20th century. It relied on terrorist tactics and carried out
hundreds of political assassinations. By 1917 it was Russia’s largest
socialist group; its members included ALEKSANDR KERENSKY, VIKTOR CHERNOV,
and CATHERINE BRESHKOVSKY. The party split after the RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF
1917, and its radical wing joined the BOLSHEVIK government. It was sup-
pressed by VLADIMIR LENIN after the RUSSIAN CIVIL WAR.
Société Générale
(including BICARBONATE OF SODA, CAUSTIC SODA, sodium NITRATE [Chile SALTPE-
TRE], and SODIUM CHLORIDE), has VALENCE 1. Sodium CARBONATE, one of the four
facturing CHLORINE, CAUSTIC SODA, sodium CARBONATE, BICARBONATE OF SODA,
SOAP, and chlorine BLEACH, as well as in ceramic glazes, metallurgy, food
preservation, curing of hides, road de-icing, water softening, photogra-
phy, and many consumer products, including mineral waters, mouth-
washes, and table salt itself. It is mined, extracted from SEAWATER, and
obtained from dry salt lakes called pans. See also HALITE.
Sodom and Gomorrah
FUJIWARA FAMILY. See also NARA PERIOD.
Sogdiana
CENTAUR OBJECT, COMET, KUIPER BELT, METEORITE, and OORT CLOUD) interplanetary
dust and gas under the Sun’s gravitational control. Another component of
the solar system is the SOLAR WIND. The Sun contains more than 99% of
the mass of the solar system; most of the rest is distributed among the
nine planets, with JUPITER containing about 70%. According to the prevail-
ing theory, the solar system originated from the SOLAR NEBULA. See also
EARTH, MARS, MERCUR Y, NEPTUNE, PLUTO, SATURN, URANUS, VENUS.
soldering
solfeggio See SOLMIZATION
Solferino
Solon
Somalia Country, eastern Africa. Located in the HORN OF AFRICA, it
stretches from the Equator to the Red Sea. Area: 246,000 sq mi (637,000 sq
km). Population (2005 est.): 8,228,000 (excluding an estimated 400,000
Somaliland
Sonderbund
net. It consists of three quatrains, each with an independent rhyme
scheme, and ends with a rhymed couplet.
Sonni !All
dealing with the physical geography of geologic periods, rock breakdown
and buildup, and the formation of river terraces. Sorby is considered the
father of microscopical petrography and metallography.
sorcery See WITCHCRAFT AND SORCER Y
Sorel
BROWN, RAY CHARLES, SAM COOKE, and ARETHA FRANKLIN.
Sound, The See ØRESUND
sound reception See HEARING
Souphanouvong
1788 I
South African War (cid:2) South Asian arts
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
1790 I
South Australia (cid:2) South West Africa People’s Organization
styles. See also BHARATA NATYA; GANDHARA ART; MATHURA ART; MUGHAL ARCHI-
TECTURE; SITAR; TABLA; and such individual artists as SATYAJIT RAY; SALMAN
RUSHDIE; RAVI SHANKAR; RABINDRANATH TAGORE.
South China Sea See CHINA SEA
South Dakota State (pop., 2000: 754,844), north-central U.S. It cov-
ers 77,116 sq mi (199,730 sq km); its capital is PIERRE. South Dakota is
bordered on the north by North Dakota, on the east by Minnesota and
Iowa, on the south by Nebraska, and on the west by Wyoming and Mon-
tana. The state has three main regions—the eastern prairie; the central
GREAT PLAINS, which contain the BADLANDS; and the BLACK HILLS to the west.
The MISSOURI RIVER bisects it from north to south. The French explored the
area in the 18th century and sold it to the U.S. as part of the LOUISIANA
PURCHASE in 1803. The LEWIS AND CLARK EXPEDITION spent about seven weeks
there in 1804. The Dakota Territory was created in 1861, but settlement
was sparse until the Black Hills gold rush of 1875–76 swelled the popu-
lation. Intermittent wars between the Indians and immigrant whites
occurred until the massacre at WOUNDED KNEE in 1890. South Dakota
became the 40th U.S. state in 1889. Farming and related industries form
the state’s economic base. It is a leader in cattle and hog production, and
its main crops are grains. Tourism is a major industry; attractions include
Mount RUSHMORE, WIND CAVE NATIONAL PARK, Badlands National Park, and
JEWEL CAVE NATIONAL MONUMENT.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
NORTH ISLAND by COOK STRAIT, it has an
P. CHANDRA
The god Shiva in the garb of a mendi-
cant, South Indian bronze from Tiru-
vengadu, Tamil Nadu, early 11th
century; in the Thanjavur Museum and
Art Gallery, Tamil Nadu
South West Africa See NAMIBIA
South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) Party in
South West Africa (now Namibia) that advocated immediate independence
from South Africa. Founded in 1960, it used diplomacy to attain its goals
Southampton, Henry Wriothesley, 3rd earl of (b. Oct. 6,
Southampton, Thomas Wriothesley
Southey
Soyuz
1794 I
spacecraft (cid:2) Spain
Spagnuolo, Pietro See Pedro
BERRUGUETE
Spahn, Warren (Edward) (b.
April 23, 1921, Buffalo, N.Y.,
U.S.—d. Nov. 24, 2003, Broken
Arrow, Okla.) U.S. baseball pitcher.
Spahn spent most of his career with
the Boston (later Milwaukee) Braves
(1942, 1946–64). He amassed 2,583
career strikeouts, giving him the
third highest total in baseball history
when he retired. His feat of winning
20 or more games in each of 13 sea-
sons was also a record, as was his
striking out at least 100 batters each
for 17 consecutive seasons
(1947–63). His total of 363 wins
established a record for left-handers.
He was inducted into the Baseball
Hall of Fame in 1973.
ARIC and CANAR Y
SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR (1898). (See CUBA; GUAM; PHILIPPINES; PUERTO RICO.)
Soviet/Russian space station Mir, after completion in 1996. The date shown for each module is its year of launch. Docked to the
station are a Soyuz TM manned spacecraft and an unmanned Progress resupply ferry.
ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
LAUNCH VEHICLE.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Spalatin
Sparta or Lacedaemon
source of modern standard Spanish, arose in the 9th century in north-
central Spain (Old Castile) and spread to central Spain (New Castile) by the
11th century. In the late 15th century the kingdoms of Castile, León, and
Aragon merged, and Castilian became the official language of all Spain,
with CATALAN and Galician (effectively a dialect of PORTUGUESE) becoming
regional languages and Aragonese and Leonese reduced to a fraction of
their original speech areas. Latin American regional dialects are derived
from Castilian but differ from it in PHONOLOGY.
Spanish Main Northern coast of South America. The term refers to an
area that was once under Spanish control and spanned roughly between
the Isthmus of PANAMA and the delta of the ORINOCO RIVER. The term can
also refer to the Caribbean Sea and adjacent waters, especially when
referring to the period when the region was troubled by pirates.
Spanish Mission style See MISSION STYLE
Spanish Sahara See WESTERN SAHARA
Spark, Muriel (Sarah) orig. Muriel Sarah Camberg (b. Feb.
relayed from the eyes, ears, muscles, and skin. The senses may not per-
ceive gradual changes in motion and may overestimate the degree of
abrupt changes and overcompensate when motion stops. Airplane pilots
and divers also contend with apparent changes in gravitational pull, which
can lead to dangerous situations and must be overcome by training. See
also INNER EAR; PROPRIOCEPTION.
speaker See LOUDSPEAKER
Spearman, Charles E(dward)
Special Forces See GREEN BERETS
Special Olympics International sports program for people with men-
tal retardation. It provides year-round training and athletic competition in
a variety of Olympic-type summer and winter sports for participants.
Inaugurated in 1968 through the efforts of Eunice Kennedy Shriver and
the Chicago Park District, the Special Olympics was officially recognized
by the International Olympic Committee in 1988. Games are held every
two years, alternating between winter and summer sports. International
headquarters are in Washington, D.C.
special prosecutor See INDEPENDENT COUNSEL
speciation
spectrophotometry
WALKER.
A. AKERLOF and JOSEPH E. STIGLITZ.
Spender, Sir Stephen (Harold) (b. Feb. 28, 1909, London,
Spengler
Sperry, Roger (b. Aug. 20, 1913, Hartford, Conn., U.S.—d. April 17,
1994, Pasadena, Calif.) U.S. neurobiologist. He earned a doctorate in
zoology from the University of Chicago. He studied functional special-
ization in the hemispheres of the cerebral cortex, examining animals and
then humans with epilepsy in whose brains the corpus callosum had been
severed. His research showed that the left side of the brain is normally
dominant for analytical and verbal tasks and the right for spatial tasks,
music, and certain other areas. His techniques laid the groundwork for
much more specialized explorations. He shared a 1981 Nobel Prize with
DAVID HUBEL and TORSTEN WIESEL.
Spiegel, Der
mechanical spinning. The result was a series of inventions that converted
the spinning wheel into a powered, mechanized component of the INDUS-
TRIAL REVOLUTION (see DRAWING FRAME; SPINNING JENNY; WATER FRAME).
Spinoza
spirochete
Spokane
spotted fever See ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER
concerns. See also CROP DUSTER; FUNGICIDE; HERBICIDE; INSECTICIDE.
spreadsheet Computer SOFTWARE that allows the user to enter columns
and rows of numbers in a ledgerlike format. Any cell of the ledger may
contain either data or a formula that describes the value that should be
inserted therein based on the values in other cells. When a change is made
in one cell, the program recalculates the contents of all cells affected by
the change. Spreadsheets are widely used for performing business calcu-
lations on PERSONAL COMPUTERS.
Spree River
Springsteen, Bruce (Frederick Joseph) (b. Sept. 23, 1949, Free-
CASTOR-OIL PLANT, CROTON, CASSAVA, and RUBBER TREE.
Sputnik
about 35 in. (90 cm) long. Tree dwellers live in a tree hollow or nest, and
most are active year-round. Ground dwellers live in burrows, and many
become dormant in winter (hibernate) or summer (estivate). Most species
are primarily vegetarian and are fond of seeds and nuts; some eat insects
or supplement their diet with animal protein. See also CHIPMUNK; FLYING
SQUIRREL; GROUND SQUIRREL; MARMOT; PRAIRIE DOG.
squirrel monkey Any of several species (genus Saimiri, family
Cebidae) of arboreal NEW WORLD
MONKEYs, found in groups of up to
several hundred during the day in
riverside forests of Central and
South America. They eat
fruit,
insects, and small animals. They are
10–16 in. (25–40 cm) long and have
a heavy, nonprehensile, black-tipped
tail, 15–19 in. (37–47 cm) long. They
have a small white face, large eyes,
and large, usually tufted, ears. The
short, soft coat is grayish to green-
ish, with yellow or orange arms,
hands, and feet. The crown of the
common squirrel monkey (S. sci-
ureus) is olive or grayish; the red-
backed
squirrel monkey
oerstedii) has a black crown and red-
dish back.
Sraosha
GAMES.
squirrel Any of about 260 species in 50 genera (family Sciuridae) of
mostly diurnal RODENTS found almost worldwide. Many species are arbo-
real; some are terrestrial. All species have strong hind legs and a hairy
tail. They vary widely in colour and form and range in total length from
the 4-in. (10-cm) African pygmy squirrel to the giant squirrels of Asia,
Sinhalese groups has beset
the country
since the early 1980s, the Tamils demand-
ing a separate autonomous state in northern
Sri Lanka. In 2004 Sri Lanka was struck by
a tsunami that badly damaged much of the
coastline and killed tens of thousands of people.
Srinagar
stalactite and stalagmite
Staffordshire terrier See PIT BULL
TERRIER
Stalin, Joseph orig. Iosif Vissarionovich Dzhugashvili (b.
Dec. 21, 1879, Gori, Georgia, Russian Empire—d. March 5, 1953, Mos-
cow, Russia, U.S.S.R.) Soviet politician and dictator. The son of a cob-
bler, he studied at a seminary but was expelled for revolutionary activity
in 1899. He joined an underground revolutionary group and sided with
the BOLSHEVIK faction of the RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC WORKERS’ PARTY in
his rivals, including LEON TROTSKY, GRIGOR Y ZINOVYEV, LEV KAMENEV, NIKOLAY
BUKHARIN, and ALEKSEY RYKOV, and took control of Soviet politics. In 1928
he inaugurated the FIVE-YEAR PLANs that radically altered Soviet economic
and social structures and resulted in the deaths of many millions. In the
1930s he contrived to eliminate threats to his power through the PURGE TRI-
ALS and through widespread secret executions and persecution. In WORLD
WAR II he signed the GERMAN-SOVIET NONAGGRESSION PACT (1939), attacked
Finland (see RUSSO-FINNISH WAR), and annexed parts of eastern Europe to
strengthen his western frontiers. When Germany invaded Russia (1941),
Stalin took control of military operations. He allied Russia with Britain
and the U.S.; at the TEHR0N, YALTA, and POTSDAM conferences, he demon-
strated his negotiating skill. After the war he consolidated Soviet power
in eastern Europe and built up the Soviet Union as a world military power.
He continued his repressive political measures to control internal dissent;
increasingly paranoid, he was preparing to mount another purge after the
so-called DOCTORS’ PLOT when he died. Noted for bringing the Soviet Union
into world prominence, at terrible cost to his own people, he left a legacy
of repression and fear as well as industrial and military power. In 1956
Stalin and his personality cult were denounced by NIKITA KHRUSHCHEV.
Stalin Peak See IMENI ISMAIL SAMANI PEAK
Stalinabad See DUSHANBE
Stalingrad See VOLGOGRAD
TROTSKYISM.
Stalino See DONETSK
Stamboliyski
Stanhope, Charles Stanhope, 3rd Earl (b. Aug. 3, 1753, Lon-
don, Eng.—d. Dec. 15, 1816, Chevening, Kent) English politician and
inventor. A member of the House of Commons (1780–86), where he was
known as Lord Mahon until inheriting his father’s title, he became chair-
man of the Revolution Society and favoured parliamentary reform. He
sympathized with the French republicans and opposed Britain’s war with
Revolutionary France. He was also an experimental scientist and invented
calculating machines, a printing press and a microscope lens named for
him, a stereotyping machine, and a steam carriage.
Stanhope, James Stanhope, 1st Earl (b. 1673, Paris, France—d.
Stanislavsky
living determined for a group such as a country must be examined criti-
cally in terms of its constituent values. If the mean value increases over
time, but at the same time the rich become richer and the poor poorer, the
group may not be collectively better off. Various quantitative indicators
can be used as measuring rods, including life expectancy, access to nutri-
tious food and a safe water supply, and availability of medical care.
Standard Oil Company and Trust U.S. company and corporate
MEAN TIME.
DARDIZATION (ISO).
Standards and Technology, National Institute of See BUREAU
OF STANDARDS
ABLE; DWARF STAR; ECLIPSING VARIABLE STAR; FLARE STAR; GIANT STAR; POPULATIONS I
AND II; SUPERGIANT STAR; T TAURI STAR; VARIABLE STAR.
Star Wars See STRATEGIC DEFENSE INITIATIVE
starch Any of several white, granular organic compounds produced by
all green plants. They are POLYSACCHARIDES with the general chemical for-
mula (C6H10O5)n, where n may range from 100 to several thousand; the
constituent MONOSACCHARIDEs are GLUCOSE units made in PHOTOSYNTHESIS. The
stare decisis
START See STRATEGIC ARMS REDUCTION TALKS
Stasi
STD See SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASE
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Stavisky affair (cid:2) steel
Steamers Robert E. Lee and the Natchez in the race from New Orleans to St. Louis,
lithograph by Currier and Ives
BBC HULTON PICTURE LIBRARY
NACE) or scrap steel by the BASIC OXYGEN PROCESS, the OPEN-HEARTH PROCESS,
used to make bars, wire, tubes, sheets, and strips. Molten steel can also
be cast directly into products. Certain products, particularly of sheet steel,
are protected from CORROSION by ELECTROPLATING, GALVANIZING, or TINPLATING.
steel drum Tuned gong made from the end, and part of the wall, of an
oil barrel. The barrel’s end surface is hammered into a concave shape,
and several areas are outlined by chiseled grooves. It is heated and tem-
pered, and bosses or domes are hammered into the outlined areas; the
depth, curvature, and size of each boss determines its pitch. Melodies,
complex accompaniments, and COUNTERPOINT can be played with rubber-
tipped mallets on a single drum. The steel drum originated in Trinidad in
the 1940s. It is usually played in ensembles, called steel bands, of widely
varying sizes.
Steele, Sir Richard (b. 1672, Dublin, Ire.—d. Sept. 1, 1729, Car-
marthen, Carmarthenshire, Wales) English journalist, dramatist, essayist,
and politician. He began his long friendship with JOSEPH ADDISON at school
and attempted an army career before turning to writing. He launched and
was the principal author (under the name Isaac Bickerstaff) of the essay
periodical The Tatler (April 1709–January 1711), in which he created the
mixture of entertainment and instruction in manners and morals that he
and Addison would perfect in The SPECTATOR. His attractive, often casual
writing style was a perfect foil for Addison’s more measured, erudite
prose. He made many later ventures into journalism, some politically par-
tisan, and held several government posts. In 1714 he became governor of
DRUR Y LANE THEATRE, where he produced The Conscious Lovers (1723), one
of the century’s most popular plays and perhaps the best example of
English sentimental comedy.
Steen
ERNEST HEMINGWAY. An early sup-
porter of CUBISM, she tried to parallel
its theories in her work, including the
poetry
volume
Tender Buttons
(1914). Her prose was characterized
by a unique style employing repeti-
tion, fragmentation, and use of the
continuous present, especially in the
immense novel The Making of
Americans (written 1906–11, pub-
lished 1928). Her only book to reach
a wide public was The Autobiogra-
phy of Alice B. Toklas (1933), actu-
ally Stein’s own autobiography. Her
other works include Four Saints in
Three Acts (1934) and The Mother of
Us All (1947), opera librettos scored
by VIRGIL THOMSON.
Stein
stele
stenography See SHORTHAND
stenotypy
builder of long-span railroad bridges. The son of GEORGE STEPHENSON, he
assisted his father in constructing the Rocket and several railways. Build-
ing a railway from Newcastle to Berwick, he spanned the River Tyne with
a six-arch iron bridge. Called on to build a secure railroad bridge over the
Menai Strait to the Welsh mainland, Stephenson conceived a unique tubu-
lar design, the success of which led to his building other tubular bridges
in England and elsewhere.
Steptoe, Patrick (Christopher); and Edwards, Robert
Sterkfontein
reality. His later poetry, in collec-
tions such as Ideas of Order (1936),
The Man with the Blue Guitar
(1937), and The Auroras of Autumn
(1950), continued to explore this
theme with greater depth and rigour.
Not until his late years was he widely
read or recognized as a major poet by
more than a few; he received a
Pulitzer Prize only with his Col-
lected Poems in 1955. He is now
often considered one of America’s
greatest 20th-century poets.
Stevenson, Adlai E(wing) (b.
Feb. 5, 1900, Los Angeles, Calif.,
U.S.—d. July 14, 1965, London,
Eng.) U.S. politician and diplomat.
The grandson of a vice president of
the U.S., he practiced law in Chicago
from 1926. During World War II he was assistant to the secretary of the
navy (1941–44) and to the secretary of state (1945). He served as a U.S.
delegate to the UN (1946–47). As governor of Illinois (1949–53), he
introduced liberal reforms. Noted for his eloquence and wit, he was twice
the Democratic candidate for president (1952, 1956) but lost both times
to DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER. He later served as chief U.S. representative to
the UN (1961–65).
Stevenson, Robert Louis (Balfour) (b. Nov. 13, 1850, Edinburgh,
Stevin
Stiegel
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER appointed him to the SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED
mal veins (see HYDROTHERMAL ORE DEPOSITs) and in REPLACEMENT DEPOSITs. Sig-
the University of Chicago. He taught at various institutions and in 1977
founded the Center for the Study of the Economy and the State at the
University of Chicago. Stigler studied the economics of information,
elaborating on the traditional understanding of how efficient markets oper-
ate. He also studied public regulation, concluding that it is usually det-
rimental to consumer interests. He won the Nobel Prize in Economic
Sciences in 1982.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (b. Feb. 9, 1943, Gary, Ind., U.S.) U.S. economist.
He received a Ph.D. (1967) from the Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy and taught at several universities, including Yale, Harvard, Stanford,
and Columbia. From 1997 to 2000 he was the World Bank’s chief econo-
mist but often disagreed with the organization’s policies. Stiglitz helped
found modern development economics, and he changed how economists
think about the way markets work. His studies on asymmetric informa-
tion in the marketplace showed that the poorly informed can obtain infor-
mation from the better informed through a screening process, for example,
when insurance companies determine the risk factors of their clients. He
shared the 2001 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences with GEORGE A. AKER-
LOF and A. MICHAEL SPENCE.
stigmata
Stirling, William Alexander, 1st earl of (b. c. 1576, Menstrie,
stoichiometry
1826 I
stomach cancer (cid:2) Stonehenge
the SMALL INTESTINE. The vagus nerve and sympathetic nervous system con-
trol the stomach’s secretions and movements. Emotional stress affects its
function. Common disorders include GASTRITIS, PEPTIC ULCER, hiatal HERNIA, and
cancer. See also DIGESTION, GASTRECTOMY.
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION after its repu-
tation had been tarnished by the TEA-
POT DOME and other scandals. In 1925
Coolidge appointed him to the
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES,
and in 1941 Pres. FRANKLIN D.
ROOSEVELT promoted him to chief jus-
tice, a position he retained until his
death. He wrote more than 600 opin-
ions, many on important constitu-
tional questions. He was often less
successful, however, in building a
consensus among his associate jus-
tices, with the result that the court during his chief justiceship was often
a bitterly divided body.
Harlan Fiske Stone, 1929.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, WASHINGTON, D.C.
Stone, I(sidor) F(einstein) orig. Isidor Feinstein (b. Dec. 24,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
See PALEOLITHIC PERIOD; MESOLITHIC PERIOD; NEOLITHIC PERIOD; STONE-TOOL INDUS-
TR Y. See also BRONZE AGE; IRON AGE.
order) the OLDOWAN, ACHEULEAN, MOUSTERIAN, AURIGNACIAN, SOLUTREAN, and
Stonefly (Plecoptera)
WILLIAM E. FERGUSON
Storm Troopers See SA
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES by Pres. JAMES MADISON. There he joined
Stoss
also BONE CHINA, PORCELAIN.
Stono rebellion (1739) Largest
Stoppard, Sir Tom orig. Tomas Straussler (b. July 3, 1937, Zlín,
stored-program concept Storage of
solves crimes without
leaving his New York City apartment. Stout
endowed his detective with his own passions for haute cuisine and the
growing of orchids.
Stowe
Strasberg, Lee orig. Israel Strassberg (b. Nov. 17, 1901, Budza-
nów, Pol., Austria-Hungary—d. Feb. 17, 1982, New York, N.Y., U.S.)
Russian-born U.S. theatre director and teacher. At age seven he immi-
grated to New York City with his family. After acting lessons with teach-
ers who had studied under KONSTANTIN STANISLAVSKY, he became an actor
and stage manager with the Theatre Guild. In 1931 he cofounded the
GROUP THEATRE, where he directed brilliant experimental plays such as Men
in White (1933). After working in Hollywood (1941–48), he returned to
New York City to become artistic director of the ACTORS STUDIO, where he
expanded Stanislavsky’s teachings to further develop method acting, in
which actors use their own emotional memory for the purpose of dra-
matic motivation. He trained actors such as MARLON BRANDO, MARILYN MON-
ROE, DUSTIN HOFFMAN, GERALDINE PAGE, and Julie Harris.
Strasbourg
stratigraphy
Academy Award), Silkwood (1983), Out of Africa (1985), A Cry in the
Dark (1988), The Bridges of Madison County (1995), and The Hours
(2002).
streetcar or trolley car Passenger-carrying vehicle that runs on rails
laid in city streets. Streetcars in the 1830s were pulled by horses. Elec-
tric motors later supplied the power, with electricity transmitted by a trol-
ley from overhead electric lines. From the 1890s to the 1940s, streetcars
were widely used in cities around the world; they were gradually replaced
by the AUTOMOBILE, the BUS, and the SUBWAY, and by the 1950s few remained.
A variant, the cable car, invented in 1873 for use on San Francisco’s steep
hills, is drawn by a continuous cable set in a slot between the tracks.
Streicher
Strayhorn, Billy orig. William Thomas Strayhorn (b. Nov. 29,
See also LAMINAR FLOW, TURBULENT FLOW.
Streep, Meryl orig. Mary Louise Streep (b. June 22, 1949, Sum-
feres with the tubercle bacillus’s ability to synthesize certain vital pro-
teins. It still has some use in combination with penicillin for treating
endocarditis and with tetracyclines in the treatment of plague, tularemia,
and brucellosis.
Stresa Front
on the other. A variety of equipment is used, including dozers, scrapers,
hydraulic shovels, draglines, and bucket-wheel excavators. Concern over
the environmental effects of strip mining have resulted in numerous
requirements for the reclamation of excavated land.
strobilus See CONE
stroboscope Instrument that repeatedly illuminates a rotating or vibrat-
ing object in order to study the motion of the object or to determine its
rotation speed or vibration frequency. The effect is achieved by produc-
ing light in very short bursts timed to occur when the moving part is in
the same phase of its motion. By use of the stroboscope, a machine part,
for example, may be made to appear to slow down or stop.
Stroessner
ular systems, which are shaped to experience either pure tension or pure
compression. Bending structures include the GIRDER and two-way grids and
slabs. Funicular structures include CABLE STRUCTUREs, MEMBRANE STRUCTUREs,
and vaults and domes. See also FRAMED STRUCTURE; POST-AND-BEAM SYSTEM; SHELL
STRUCTURE.
ment are MICHEL FOUCAULT, JACQUES LACAN, ROMAN JAKOBSON, and ROLAND
BARTHES. Areas of study that have adopted and developed structuralist pre-
mises and methodologies include SEMIOTICS and narratology. See also
DECONSTRUCTION.
Structured Query Language See SQL
Struve
Sturges
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) Activist student orga-
PAGODAs,
places of PILGRIMAGE.
and incorporated the colony into Dutch territory (1655). Incursions from
the New England colonies and a squadron sent by Charles II forced him
to surrender New Netherland to the British (1664).
sty or hordeolum
also LAND MINE, MINESWEEPER.
submarine plateau See OCEANIC PLATEAU
submarine slump In a SUBMARINE CANYON or on a CONTINENTAL SLOPE, a
relatively rapid and sporadic downslope moving mass composed of sedi-
ment and organic debris that has built up slowly into an unstable or mar-
ginally stable mass. After an individual slump in a canyon, however, the
material tends to continue falling in a series of slumps until the sediment
mass attains a shallower, more stable slope. A slumping episode may also
trigger other slumps farther down the canyon.
subpoena
Sucre
Sudetenland
Sugawara Michizane
sukiya
Sully
Sullivan, Sir Arthur
(Sey-
SCHIZOPHRENIA, which he
Sullivan, John L(awrence) (b.
Oct. 15, 1858, Roxbury, Mass.,
Sulzberger
other by the belt. Sumo wrestling is an ancient sport with a complex sys-
tem of ranking; at the top of the hierarchy is the yokozuna (“grand cham-
pion”). Lengthy rituals and elaborate posturings accompany the bouts,
which are extremely brief, often lasting only a few seconds.
Sumter, Thomas (b. Aug. 14, 1734, Hanover county, Va.—d. June 1,
1832, South Mount, S.C., U.S.) American Revolutionary officer. He
served in the French and Indian War and later moved to South Carolina.
In the American Revolution he was commissioned a brigadier general and
escaped to North Carolina after the fall of Charleston (1780). He led the
state militia to victories over the British in several engagements. He
served in the U.S. House of Representatives (1789–93, 1797–1801) and
the Senate (1801–10). Fort Sumter was named for him (see FORT SUMTER
NATIONAL MONUMENT).
See also AMATERASU, RE, SHAMASH, SOL, SUR YA, TONATIUH.
Sun Yat-sen
Sunderland, Robert Spencer, 2nd earl of (b. Sept. 5, 1641,
PLANT.
Sundiata
supervenience
suprarenal gland See ADRENAL GLAND
Supreme Court of the United States Final court of APPEAL in the
Supreme Court have been the COMMERCE, DUE-PROCESS, and EQUAL-PROTECTION
Surabaya
SURGER Y, ORTHOPEDICS, PLASTIC SURGER Y, TRANSPLANT.
Suriname
surrogate motherhood Practice in which a woman (the surrogate
mother) bears a child for a couple unable to produce children, usually
because the wife is infertile or unable to carry a pregnancy to term. The
surrogate is impregnated either through ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION (usually with
the sperm of the husband) or through the implantation of an embryo pro-
duced by in vitro fertilization. The surrogate traditionally gives up all
parental rights, though this has been subject to legal challenge.
Surtees, Robert Smith (b. May 17, 1803, The Riding, Northumber-
land, Eng.—d. March 16, 1864, Brighton, Sussex) English novelist. Pas-
sionately addicted to riding to hounds from his youth, Surtees devoted
nearly all his writings to horses and riding. In 1831 he launched New
Sporting Magazine. His famous comic character Mr. Jorrocks, a blunt
Cockney grocer entirely given over to fox hunting, appeared in Jorrocks’s
Jaunts and Jollities (1838), Handley Cross (1843), and Hillingdon Hall
(1845). Among his other novels, which also portray the boredom, ill man-
ners, discomfort, and coarse food of English provincial life, are Hawbuck
Grange (1847) and Mr. Facey Romford’s Hounds (1865).
Surtsey
Sutherland, Dame Joan (b. Nov. 7, 1926, Sydney, Austl.) Austra-
lian soprano. After debuting in Sydney in 1947, she moved to London.
Having sung minor roles at Covent Garden from 1952, she established
her status as one of the leading coloraturas of the 20th century in a 1959
performance of Lucia di Lammermoor. She made her Metropolitan Opera
debut in 1961, and she became a favourite there and worldwide in bel
canto roles until her retirement in 1991.
Sutlej River
across the Alps; surrounded by a larger French force, he succeeded in
breaking out and, repulsing the pursuing French, escaped with most of his
army, a remarkable feat.
Suwannee
swami See SADHU AND SWAMI
Swammerdam
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
sweat gland (cid:2) sweet pea
Swedenborgians See NEW CHURCH
Sweet pea (Lathyrus odoratus)
SVEN SAMELIUS
experiments by REGINALD CRUNDALL PUNNETT and WILLIAM BATESON.
sweetbrier or eglantine Small,
Sweyn
RECOVER Y ADMINISTRATION and SOCIAL SECURITY.
Sybaris
of big-band swing. In smaller ensembles, improvised instrumental solos
generally follow a rendering of the melody.
Swiss chard See CHARD
switching theory Theory of CIRCUITs made up of ideal digital devices,
including their structure, behaviour, and design. It incorporates Boolean
logic (see BOOLEAN ALGEBRA), a basic component of modern digital switch-
ing systems. Switching is essential to telephone, telegraph, data process-
ing, and other technologies in which it is necessary to make rapid
decisions about routing information. See also QUEUING THEOR Y.
Europe. Area: 15,940 sq mi (41,284 sq km). Population (2005 est.):
7,519,000. Capitals: BERN (administrative), Lausanne (judicial). The popu-
lation is German, French, and Italian. Languages: German, French, Italian,
Sydow
Symons
Synge
Assyrians, and Babylonians. In the 6th century BC it became part of the
Persian ACHAEMENIAN EMPIRE, which fell to ALEXANDER THE GREAT in 330 BC.
system of equations or simultaneous equations In algebra,
two or more equations to be solved together (i.e., the solution must sat-
isfy all the equations in the system). For a system to have a unique solu-
tion, the number of equations must equal the number of unknowns. Even
then a solution is not guaranteed. If a solution exists, the system is con-
sistent; if not, it is inconsistent. A system of linear equations can be rep-
resented by a MATRIX whose elements are the coefficients of the equations.
Though simple systems of two equations in two unknowns can be solved
by substitution, larger systems are best handled with matrix techniques.
systems analysis In INFORMATION PROCESSING, a phase of SYSTEMS ENGI-
network software, and DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS.
Szczecin
T cell With the B CELL, one of the two main types of white blood cell, essen-
tial parts of the immune system. T cells originate in the bone marrow,
mature in the thymus, and travel in the blood to other lymphoid tissues,
such as the spleen, tonsils, and lymph nodes. Through receptor molecules
on their surfaces, T cells directly attack invaders (ANTIGENS) by binding to
them and helping remove them from the body. Because the body contains
millions of T and B cells, many of which carry unique receptors, it can
respond to virtually any antigen. See also ANTIBODY, IMMUNOLOGY.
T Tauri
Tachism
Tafilalt
Taha Hussein or Taha Husayn
and ermine) and is home to elks, bears, and wolves. Siberian taiga alone
accounts for 19% of the world’s forested area and possibly 25% of total
forest volume. Despite the remoteness of the taiga, it is a major source
of lumber for construction, and huge expanses have been clear-cut.
Taiga, Ike no See IKE NO TAIGA
Taine
Taiyuan
dynasty and of ALEXANDER THE GREAT and his successors. In the 7th–8th cen-
tury AD it was conquered by the Arabs, who introduced Islam. The Uzbeks
controlled the region in the 15th–18th centuries. In the 1860s the Russian
Empire took over much of Tajikistan. In 1924 it became an autonomous
republic under the administration of the Uzbek S.S.R., and it gained union
republic status in 1929. It achieved independence with the collapse of the
Soviet Union in 1991. Civil war raged through much of the 1990s between
government forces and an opposition composed mostly of Islamic mili-
tants. A peace agreement was reached in 1997.
Tajumulco
km) before joining the larger COOSA RIVER just north of MONTGOMER Y, Ala.,
to form the ALABAMA RIVER. Three private power dams have created reser-
voirs, including Lake Martin, for river control, power, and recreation.
Tallchief, Maria (b. Jan. 24, 1925, Fairfax, Okla., U.S.) U.S. ballet
dancer of Native American descent.
Tallchief
studied with BRONISLAVA
NIJINSKA before joining the BALLET
RUSSE DE MONTE CARLO (1942–47). She
joined the NEW YORK CITY BALLET in
1948 and became its prima ballerina,
creating leading roles in many bal-
choreographed for her by
(her husband
from 1946 to 1952), including Sym-
phonie concertante (1947), Caracole
(1952), and Pas de dix (1955). She
left the company in 1965, became
artistic director of the Lyric Opera
Ballet in Chicago, and founded the
Chicago City Ballet in 1980.
GEORGE BALANCHINE
Talleyrand
of the ANC. He became the ANC’s deputy president in 1958 and was
forced into exile in Zambia when it was banned in 1960. He was elected
ANC president in 1969 after the death of ALBERT LUTULI. He returned to South
Africa in ill health in 1990 and yielded the party presidency to Mandela.
tambourine Small frame drum with one skin nailed or glued to a shal-
low circular frame, into which jingles or pellet bells are set. It is held with
one hand and struck with the other, or simply shaken. Tambourines were
played in ancient Mesopotamia, Greece, and Rome, especially in religious
contexts, and they have long been prominent in Middle Eastern folk and
religious use. Crusaders took them to Europe in the 13th century.
Tamburlaine See TIMUR
Tamerlane See TIMUR
Tamil
Tan Malaka
Tanganyika
Tannenberg
Tanzimat
Tappan
Taranto
it was an important trade centre on the caravan routes to Europe and East
Asia. The Arabs conquered it in the early 8th century; it fell to the Mon-
gols in the 13th century and was under Turkish control in the 14th–15th
centuries. Taken by the Russians in 1865, it was made the administrative
centre of Turkistan in 1867, and a new European city grew up beside the
old native one. The city was heavily damaged by an earthquake in 1966.
Today it is the main economic and cultural centre of Central Asia. Its many
institutions of higher education include the Uzbek Academy of Sciences
(1943).
Tasman
the museum became completely independent only in 1954. In 1987 the
Clore Gallery was built to house the principal collection of J.M.W. TURNER’s
works. In 1988 a branch was opened in Liverpool. The Tate Modern, a con-
verted power plant housing the modern collections, opened in 2000.
Tathagata
during the ENGLISH CIVIL WARS and subsequently dismantled. Taunton later
was the scene of the duke of MONMOUTH’s rebellion (1685). It is in an
agricultural region; tourism is also important to the economy.
Taupo
down), with devastating neurological effects. Infants appear normal at
birth but soon become listless and inattentive, lose motor abilities, and
develop seizures. Blindness and general paralysis usually precede death.
Tests can detect the disease in fetuses and the Tay-Sachs gene in carriers.
There is no treatment.
Taylor, Dame Elizabeth (Rosemond) (b. Feb. 27, 1932, London,
TAYLORISM.
Taylor, John known as John Taylor of Caroline (b. Dec. 19?,
Taylor, Peter (Hillsman)
ceeded by MILLARD FILLMORE.
MOTION STUDY.
Taymyr
Tbilisi
tear duct and gland or lachrymal
Tees River
Teleki
munist, he devoted much energy to his crusade to keep the U.S. ahead of
the Soviet Union in nuclear arms; he opposed nuclear weapons treaties,
and he was principally responsible for convincing Pres. Ronald Reagan
of the need for the STRATEGIC DEFENSE INITIATIVE. In 2003 Teller was awarded
the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
Telloh See LAGASH
Telugu
ter, who conducts services and often asks for donations. BILLY GRAHAM
became known worldwide through his TV specials from the 1950s on.
Other prominent televangelists have included ORAL ROBERTS, JERR Y FALWELL,
and PAT ROBERTSON.
Tell Asmar See ESHNUNNA
Tell el-Amarna See Tell el-AMARNA
Tell Mardlkh See EBLA
and in 1943 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER
the MANHATTAN
PROJECT. At
recruited him for
the war’s end, Teller
advocated development of a fusion
bomb, and he won permission after
initial government resistance. With
STANISLAW ULAM he developed a work-
able HYDROGEN BOMB in 1952. That
same year he helped establish the
Lawrence Livermore Laboratory
(Livermore, Calif.), which became
the chief U.S. factory for nuclear weapons. In 1954 he joined the oppo-
sition to Oppenheimer’s continued security clearance. A staunch anticom-
Tempest, Dame Marie orig. Marie Susan Etherington (b. July
15, 1864, London, Eng.—d. Oct. 15, 1942, London) British actress. She
began her career as an operetta singer, winning acclaim for her charming
and high-spirited performances in Dorothy (1887) and touring the U.S. and
Canada in the early 1890s in operettas such as The Bohemian Girl and The
Pirates of Penzance. Turning to straight comedy in 1899, she appeared
notably in English Nell (1900), Mrs. Dot (1908), and Hay Fever (1925).
Tempietto
Ten Thousand Smokes, Valley of Volcanic region, southern
tenant See LANDLORD AND TENANT
tendinitis or tendonitis
Tennyson
ALBERT EINSTEIN, the success of his general theory of RELATIVITY led to their
widespread exploration and use by mathematicians and physicists.
tent caterpillar Any MOTH LARVA of the genus Malacosoma (family
Lasiocampidae). Tent caterpillars are often brightly coloured. Congrega-
tions of the eastern tent caterpillar (M. americanum) of eastern North
America spin huge, tent-shaped communal nests in forked tree branches.
Eggs the moth deposits on a tree in midsummer hatch in spring. The
hatched caterpillars migrate to a tree crotch and construct a silken tent,
which they leave each day throughout the summer to feed on the sur-
rounding leaves. The forest tent caterpillar (M. disstria) is common in the
southern U.S.
tent structure Building that uses masts or poles and tensile membrane
(e.g., fabric or animal skin) enclosures. Tent structures are prestressed by
externally applied forces so that they are held taut under anticipated load
conditions. Tents have been the dwelling places of most of the world’s
nomadic peoples, from ancient times until the present. The traditional
Bedouin tent consists of a rectangular membrane of strips of woven camel
hair that is strained on webbing straps and secured with guys over a rect-
angle of poles. The American Plains Indians developed the conical TEPEE.
The Central Asian nomadic pole dwelling, or yurt, uses skins and textiles
as its covering. See also MEMBRANE STRUCTURE, POLE CONSTRUCTION.
Tenure of Office Act (1867) Law forbidding the U.S. president to
remove civil officers without the consent of the Senate. Passed by the
RADICAL REPUBLICANs over the veto of Pres. ANDREW JOHNSON, the measure
sought to prevent Johnson from removing cabinet members who sup-
ported Congress’s harsh RECONSTRUCTION policies. When Johnson tried to
dismiss his secretary of war, EDWIN M. STANTON, an ally of the Radical
Republicans, Congress began IMPEACHMENT proceedings against him. The
law was partially repealed in 1869 and completely repealed in 1887; in
1926 it was found unconstitutional.
Tenzing Norgay
Teresa (of Calcutta), Blessed Mother orig. Agnes Gonxha
Teresa of Ávila, Saint orig. Teresa de Cepeda y Ahumada
Tereshkova
BEDLINGTON terrier, BOSTON TERRIER, BULL TERRIER, DANDIE DINMONT terrier, FOX
TERRIER, IRISH TERRIER, PIT BULL TERRIER, SCOTTISH TERRIER, YORKSHIRE TERRIER.
Terror, Reign of See REIGN OF TERROR
Tertiary
testcross Experiment in which an organism with unknown genetic
makeup is mated with an organism whose entire genetic makeup for a
trait is known, to determine which genes are carried by the former. In a
breed of dog, for example, in which the gene for black coat colour is
dominant over the gene for red coat colour (see DOMINANCE), a dog with a
black coat may be pure (with two genes for black coat colour) or hybrid
(with one gene for black and one for red). When its mating with a red-
coated dog (which always has two genes for red coat colour only) pro-
duces only black offspring, the black-coated parent must be pure, whereas
if some of the young are red, the parent must be hybrid.
testes or testicles Male reproductive organs (see REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM).
Humans have two oval-shaped testes 1.5–2 in. (4–5 cm) long that produce
SPERM and ANDROGENS (mainly TESTOSTERONE), contained in a sac (scrotum)
behind the PENIS. Each testis is divided into 200–400 lobes containing three
to 10 very thin coiled tubes (seminiferous tubules) each, which produce the
sperm and contract to expel them through a complex network of canals to
another structure in the scrotum, the epididymis, for temporary storage.
The cells in the testes are undeveloped in early childhood; at PUBERTY they are
stimulated by hormones to develop into fertile sperm cells.
testicular cancer Malignant tumour of the TESTIS, or testicle. Although
relatively rare, testicular CANCER is the most common malignancy for men
between the ages of 20 and 34. It typically affects men between 15 and
39 years old. A developmental abnormality of males in which one or both
testes fail to descend into the scrotum about the time of birth increases
the risk of developing the cancer later in life. The most notable symptom
of testicular cancer is the formation of a painless lump in either testis.
Treatment usually consists of the surgical removal of the cancerous tes-
tis, followed by radiation therapy or chemotherapy if the cancer has
metastasized.
testing machine Machine used in MATERIALS SCIENCE to determine the
properties of a material. Machines have been devised to measure TENSILE
strength, strength in compression, shear, and bending (see STRENGTH OF
MATERIALS), DUCTILITY, HARDNESS, impact strength (see IMPACT TEST), FRACTURE
toughness, CREEP, and FATIGUE. Standardization of machines and tests is the
province of the International Organization for Standardization, American
National Standards Institute, British Standards Institution, and many gov-
ernmental bodies. Many industries have special-purpose testing machines
for the materials they use.
testosterone
Tewodros II
Thales of Miletus
While secretary-general, he played a diplomatic role in the CUBAN MISSILE
CRISIS, devised a plan to end the Congolese civil war (1962), and sent
peacekeeping forces to Cyprus (1964).
Thapsus
times. From the 17th century the PROSCENIUM stage limited audience seat-
ing to the area directly in front of the stage. In the 1930s, plays at Mos-
cow’s Realistic Theatre were produced in the round and the arena stage
began to gain favour in Europe and the U.S. Its advantages are its infor-
mality and the rapport it creates between audience and actors, but it
requires actors to turn constantly to address new sections of the audience.
Théâtre National Populaire
Theodorakis
granted the authority of a religious teacher or the validity of a religious
experience. It is distinguished from PHILOSOPHY in being concerned with
justifying and explicating a faith, rather than questioning the underlying
assumptions of such faith, but it often employs quasi-philosophical meth-
Theophilus
thermal radiation Process by which energy is emitted by a warm
surface. The energy is ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION and so travels at the speed
of light and does not require a medium to carry it. Thermal radiation
ranges in FREQUENCY from infrared rays through visible light to ultraviolet
rays. The intensity and frequency distribution of the emitted rays are
determined by the nature and temperature of the emitting surface; in gen-
eral, the hotter the object, the shorter the wavelength. A hotter object is a
better emitter than a cooler one, and a blackened surface is a better emit-
ter than a silvered one. An example of thermal radiation is the heating of
the Earth by the Sun.
thermal spring See HOT SPRING
Thermidorian Reaction (1794) Revolt in the FRENCH REVOLUTION
against the REIGN OF TERROR that was initiated on 9 Thermidor (July 27).
Weary of the mounting executions (1,300 in June alone), deputies in the
NATIONAL CONVENTION decreed the arrest of MAXIMILIEN ROBESPIERRE, LOUIS DE
SAINT-JUST, and other members of the COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC SAFETY. They and
others were guillotined, inaugurating a brief “White Terror” against the
radical JACOBIN CLUB. The DIRECTOR Y period followed soon afterward.
thermocouple or thermal junction or thermoelectric ther-
thermometry
Thessaloníki
Third Section or Third Department Office created in 1826 by Tsar
Thirteen Articles of Faith or Thirteen Principles of Faith Sum-
Thiruvananthapuram formerly Trivandrum
Thomas, Lowell (Jackson) (b. April 6, 1892, Woodington, Ohio,
U.S.—d. Aug. 29, 1981, Pawling,
N.Y.) U.S. radio commentator, jour-
nalist, and author. A war correspon-
dent in Europe and the Middle East
while in his 20s, Thomas helped
make T.E. LAWRENCE famous with his
exclusive coverage and later with the
book With Lawrence in Arabia
(1924). He was a preeminent broad-
caster with CBS from 1930; his radio
nightly news was an American insti-
tution for nearly two generations,
and he appeared on television from
its earliest days. Out of his lifelong
globetrotting came lectures, travel-
ogues, and more than 50 books of
adventure and comment, including
Kabluk of the Eskimo (1932) and The
Seven Wonders of the World (1956).
Thomas, Norman (Mattoon)
Thomas à Kempis orig. Thomas Hemerken (b. 1379/80,
Thomas Aquinas, Saint See AQUINAS, SAINT THOMAS
Thomism
of photons. He later discovered isotopes and invented MASS SPECTROMETR Y.
In 1906 Thomson received a Nobel Prize for his research into the elec-
trical conductivity of gases. Throughout his life he was noted as an out-
standing teacher, and seven of his assistants also became Nobel laureates.
Thomson (of Fleet), Roy (Herbert) Thomson, 1st Baron (b.
Thonet
Thorpe, Jim in full James Francis Thorpe (b. May 28, 1888, near
Thorvaldsen
Three Emperors’ League German Dreikaiserbund Diplomatic
See also AUSTRO-GERMAN ALLIANCE.
threonine
including the hermit thrush and WOOD THRUSH, have notably beautiful songs.
See also BLACKBIRD, BLUEBIRD, CHAT, OUZEL, REDSTART, ROBIN.
Thuan Thien See LE LOI
Thucydides
thymine
Tiber River
stage—egg, larva, nymph, adult—on the ground; at the completion of
each stage, they attach to a host (usually a MAMMAL), engorge on blood,
then drop to the ground. Soft ticks feed intermittently, pass through sev-
eral nymphal stages, and live in the host’s den or nest. Hard ticks may
draw large amounts of blood, secrete paralyzing or lethal neurotoxins, and
transmit diseases. Soft ticks may also carry diseases. The deer tick is the
principal vector of LYME disease.
Ticonderoga
Tiglath-pileser
Tikhomirov
FRAMED structure, POST-AND-BEAM SYSTEM.
timbre
TimiÃ
Tippecanoe
Tishtrya
Titian
Tlaloc
Tocantins
lition government as vice premier (1945). He advocated a national,
democratically oriented form of communism and made the Italian Com-
munist Party the largest in western Europe. See also DEMOCRATIC PARTY OF
THE LEFT.
Togtokhtör See TO-WANG
T§j§ Hideki
Toland
Tolstoy, Aleksey (Konstantinovich), Count (b. Sept. 5, 1817, St.
Petersburg, Russia—d. Oct. 10, 1875, Krasny Rog) Russian poet, novel-
ist, and dramatist. A distant relative of LEO TOLSTOY, he held various court
posts. In the 1850s he began to publish comic verse, often satirizing gov-
ernment bureaucracy. Among his popular historical novels is Prince Sere-
brenni (1862). His dramatic trilogy about the 16th and 17th centuries—
The Death of Ivan the Terrible (1866), Tsar Feodor Ioannovich (1868),
and Tsar Boris (1870)—is written in blank verse and contains some of
Russia’s best historical dramatic writing. His lyric poetry includes many
love and nature poems, as well as Ioann Damaskin (1859), a paraphrase
of St. John of Damascus’s prayer for the dead.
Tolstoy, Aleksey (Nikolayevich), Count (b. Jan. 10, 1883,
Tolstoy, Leo Russian Lev Nikolayevich, Count Tolstoy (b. Sept.
LIZATION.
Toluca
Ringo, who brought the town a reputation for lawlessness. Feuds were
common, including the 1881 gun battle at the O.K. Corral between the
Earp (see WYATT EARP) and Clanton families. Tombstone was declared a
national historic landmark in 1962.
tomography
Tonkin Gulf Resolution See GULF OF TONKIN RESOLUTION
Tonle Sap
BLEEDING KANSAS.
topology
Tormé
to power in 1968 in a coup d’état. A nationalist and populist, he was one
of the few Latin American heads of state to visit FIDEL CASTRO in Cuba,
though he suppressed leftist labour agitators and students at home. In 1977
he achieved his supreme goal when U.S. Pres. JIMMY CARTER signed two
treaties agreeing to transfer the PANAMA CANAL and CANAL ZONE to Pana-
manian sovereignty in 1999. He died in a plane crash while on a military
inspection tour.
Tórshavn
Total Quality Control (TQC) System for optimizing production
based on ideas developed by Japanese industries from the 1950s on. The
system, which blends Western and Eastern ideas, began with the concept
of quality circles, in which groups of 10–20 workers were given respon-
sibility for the quality of the products they produced. It gradually evolved
into various techniques involving both workers and managers to maxi-
mize productivity and quality, including close monitoring of staff and
excellent customer service. The concept of kaizen,
the notion that
improvement must involve all members of a company, is central to TQC.
See also PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT.
Total Quality Management
(TQM) Management practices
designed to improve the performance of organizational processes in busi-
ness and industry. Based on concepts developed by statistician and man-
agement theorist W. EDWARDS DEMING, TQM includes techniques for
achieving efficiency, solving problems, imposing standardization and sta-
tistical control, and regulating design, housekeeping, and other aspects of
business or production processes. See also INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR
STANDARDIZATION (ISO); TOTAL QUALITY CONTROL (TQC).
Totonac
possibilities of the genre. His pieces are often sharply satirical, but he was
also capable of great sympathy, seen most poignantly in his studies of
prostitutes (e.g., At the Salon, 1896). His extraordinary style helped set
the course of avant-garde art for decades to come. A heavy drinker, he
died at 36.
Toungoo
towhee
decline of 26 civilizations. Criticisms of his Study include his use of myths
and metaphors as being of comparable value to factual data and his reliance
on a view of religion as a regenerative force. His other works include Civi-
lization on Trial (1948), East to West (1958), and Hellenism (1959).
Toyota Motor Corp. Largest Japanese automobile manufacturer and
one of the largest automotive companies in the world. It was established
in 1933 as a division of the Toyoda Automatic Loom Works, Ltd., and in
1937 it was incorporated as the Toyota Motor Co., Ltd. Toyota later estab-
lished many related companies, including Toyoda Machine Works, Ltd.
(1941), and Toyota Auto Body, Ltd. (1945). In the 1960s and ’70s the
company expanded rapidly, exporting large numbers of cars to foreign
markets. Following consolidations among many of its business units, the
company took the name Toyota Motor Corp. in 1982. It has assembly
plants and distributors in many foreign countries, and it owns subsidiar-
ies that produce cars and car parts, trucks, steel, synthetic resins, and
industrial equipment. Its brands include Toyota and Lexus.
Toyotomi Hideyoshi
trade, restraint of See RESTRAINT OF TRADE
trade, terms of Relationship between the prices at which a country
sells its exports and the prices paid for its imports. If a country’s export
prices rise relative to import prices, its terms of trade are said to have
moved in a favourable direction, since, in effect, it now receives more
imports for each unit of goods exported. The terms of trade, which depend
on the world supply of and demand for the goods involved, indicate how
the gains from international trade will be distributed among trading coun-
tries. An abrupt change in a country’s terms of trade (e.g., a drastic fall
in the price of its main export) can cause serious problems in its BALANCE
OF PAYMENTS. See also COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE.
Trafalgar
Trans-Alaska Pipeline or Alaska Pipeline Oil pipeline running
Trans World Airlines, Inc. (TWA) Former U.S. airline acquired by
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
trampoline (cid:2) transformer
See also TRANSCENDENTAL NUMBER.
as RALPH WALDO EMERSON, HENR Y DAVID THOREAU, MARGARET FULLER, and BRON-
SON ALCOTT. Transcendentalist writers and their contemporaries signaled
the emergence of a new national culture based on native materials, and
they were a major part of the AMERICAN RENAISSANCE in literature. They
advocated reforms in church, state, and society, contributing to the rise
of free religion and the abolition movement and to the formation of vari-
ous utopian communities, such as BROOK FARM. Some of the best writings
by minor Transcendentalists appeared in The Dial (1840–44), a literary
magazine.
transducer Device that converts one form of energy to another. A
MICROPHONE is an acoustic transducer, converting sound waves into elec-
trical signals. Different types of transducers act on heat, radiation, sound,
strain, vibrations, pressure, and acceleration; they may output mechani-
cal, electrical, pneumatic, or hydraulic signals. Examples include STRAIN
GAUGES, LOUDSPEAKERS, PHOTOCELLS, TRANSFORMERS, and THERMOCOUPLES.
transept Area of a cruciform (cross-shaped) church lying at right angles
to the principal axis. The bay at which the transept intersects the NAVE is
called the crossing. The nave of a church with a cruciform plan usually
extends west from the crossing, the choir and sanctuary east. The arms
of the transept are designated by direction, as northern transept and south-
ern transept.
transform See FOURIER TRANSFORM, INTEGRAL TRANSFORM, LAPLACE TRANSFORM
undoes it) in the group. See also GROUP THEOR Y, INTEGRAL TRANSFORM, LINEAR
TRANSFORMATION.
transformer Device that transfers electric energy from one ALTERNATING-
CURRENT CIRCUIT to one or more other circuits, either increasing (stepping
up) or reducing (stepping down) the voltage. Uses for transformers
include reducing the line voltage to operate low-voltage devices (door-
bells or toy electric trains) and raising the voltage from electric GENERA-
TORS so that electric power can be transmitted over long distances.
Transformers act through ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION; current in the primary
coil induces current in the secondary coil. The secondary voltage is cal-
culated by multiplying the primary voltage by the ratio of the number of
turns in the secondary coil to that in the primary.
transfusion See BLOOD TRANSFUSION
transistor SOLID-STATE SEMICONDUCTOR device for amplifying, controlling,
and generating electrical signals. Invented at Bell Labs (1947) by JOHN
BARDEEN, WALTER H. BRATTAIN, and WILLIAM B. SHOCKLEY, it displaced the
See also RARE EARTH METAL.
transitive law Property of relationship that states that if A is in a given
relation to B and B is in the same relation to C, then A is also in that
relation to C. Equality, for example, is a transitive relation.
Transkei
SEABORG.
Transvaal
Trebbia River
Trenton and Princeton, Battles of (1776–77) Engagements won
Trevelyan
TRIGONOMETR Y.
Trianon
trichomonad
trimurti
triple jump or hop, step, and jump TRACK-AND-FIELD distance jump.
Tripoli
triumvirate
Trondheim
TROUT; BROWN TROUT; LAKE TROUT; RAINBOW TROUT.
trouvère
developed in the 1820s. The trumpet has been associated with ceremo-
nial and military uses since the 16th century. It joined the standard orches-
tra by c. 1700, though it was only selectively used, usually with the
timpani. Its brilliant sound has since made it indispensable in a wide vari-
ety of ensembles. See also CORNET; FLÜGELHORN.
trumpeter swan Black-billed species (Cygnus cygnus buccinator) of
SWAN, named for its far-carrying, low-pitched call. About 6 ft (1.8 m) long,
with a 10-ft (3-m) wingspan, it is the largest swan, though it weighs less
than the mute swan. Once threatened with extinction (fewer than 100 were
counted in the U.S. in 1935), it has made a strong comeback; though still
listed as vulnerable, its population in western Canada and the northwest-
ern U.S. now exceeds 5,000.
Truong Chinh
Truth, Sojourner orig. Isabella Van Wagener (b. c. 1797, Ulster
county, N.Y., U.S.—d. Nov. 26,
1883, Battle Creek, Mich.) U.S.
evangelist and social reformer. The
daughter of slaves, she spent her
childhood as an abused chattel of
several masters. After being freed in
about 1827, she worked as a domes-
tic in New York City (1829–43) and
began preaching on street corners
with the evangelical missionary Eli-
jah Pierson. Adopting the name
Sojourner Truth, she left New York
to obey a “call” to travel and preach.
Adding ABOLITIONISM and women’s
rights to her religious messages, she
traveled in the Midwest, where her
magnetism drew large crowds. At the
start of the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR she
gathered supplies for black volunteer
regiments.
In 1864 she went
Washington, D.C., where she helped
integrate streetcars and was received
at the White House by Pres. ABRAHAM LINCOLN. After the war she worked
for the freedmen’s relief organization and encouraged migration to Kan-
sas and Missouri.
TRW Inc. U.S. manufacturer of advanced equipment and systems for
industry and government. Founded in 1901 as a maker of cap screws, it
was incorporated in 1916 as the Steel Products Co. The name was changed
to Thompson Products, Inc., in 1926, then to Thompson Ramo Woold-
ridge Inc. after a merger in 1958, and to TRW Inc. in 1965. Through its
various divisions and subsidiaries, TRW designed and manufactured a
wide range of automotive parts, electronic systems for military aircraft,
and spacecraft. Its information systems and services segments maintain
databases for screening credit histories. In 2002 defense contractor
Northrop Grumman acquired TRW for its aerospace division.
tryptophan
Tsvet
BROWN, who called her General Tubman. In the American Civil War, she
served as a nurse, laundress, and spy for Union forces in South Carolina.
She later settled in Auburn, N.Y., and was eventually granted a federal
pension for her war work.
Tubman, William V(acanarat) S(hadrach) (b. Nov. 29, 1895,
Harper, Liberia—d. July 23, 1971, London, Eng.) President of Liberia
(1944–71). Tubman educated himself in law before entering public ser-
vice, eventually ascending to the Supreme Court (1937–44). As president,
Tubman enacted suffrage and property rights for women, authorized par-
ticipation in government by all ethnic groups, and established a nation-
wide public-school system.
Tuchman
37); he was made a marshal of the Soviet Union in 1935. A victim of the
PURGE TRIALS in 1937, he was tried and executed with other top Red Army
commanders. In 1988 he was cleared judicially and rehabilitated by offi-
cial decree.
Tukulor
apparatus, high-speed rotors, and SOLAR-ENERGY devices. Tungsten is rela-
tively inert, but compounds (in which it has various VALENCEs) are known.
The most important, tungsten CARBIDE, noted for its hardness, is used to
increase the wear-resistance of cast iron and of tools’ cutting edges.
tungsten-halogen lamp See HALOGEN LAMP
Tungusic languages See MANCHU-TUNGUS LANGUAGES
Tunguska event
Tupac Amarú
Turcoman See TURKMEN
Turenne
Turkana, Lake See Lake RUDOLF
Turing test (cid:2) Turkic peoples
Male common turkey (Meleagris gallo-
pavo), displaying.
S.C. BISSEROT—BRUCE COLEMAN INC.
turkey vulture or turkey buzzard Species (Cathartes aura) of
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
istan. The nomadic, tribal Turkmen prob-
ably entered the area in the 11th century
AD. They were conquered by the Russians
in the early 1880s, and the region became
part of Russian Turkistan. It was organized
as the Turkmen S.S.R. in 1924 and became a constituent republic of the
U.S.S.R. in 1925. The country gained full independence from the Soviet
Union in 1991 under the name Turkmenistan. It experienced years of eco-
nomic difficulty until oil and gas production was more fully developed
and was subject to the highly authoritarian rule of Saparmurad Niyazov.
Turks and Caicos
Turner, J(oseph) M(allord) W(illiam) (b. April 23, 1775, London,
Turner, Ted orig. Robert Edward Turner, III (b. Nov. 19, 1938,
PAINTED TURTLE, SNAPPING TURTLE, SOFTSHELL TURTLE, TERRAPIN, TORTOISE.
Tusculum
Tussaud
tury the town was called Soli (meaning “salts”), and its present name is
from the Turkish tuz, “salt.” It was a Turkish garrison town from 1510
until it passed to the Austro-Hungarian Empire in the 19th century. It was
incorporated into Yugoslavia in 1918. It is the centre for a mining region
and an agricultural district. It was a target during the war in Bosnia in the
1990s (see BOSNIAN CONFLICT).
TVA See TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY
TWA See TRANS WORLD AIRLINES, INC.
Twain, Mark orig. Samuel Langhorne Clemens (b. Nov. 30,
Tweed, William Marcy known as Boss Tweed (b. April 3, 1823,
COURTESY OF THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, WASHINGTON,
Boss Tweed
TVA (cid:2) Tyler
pered by the fact that court judgments were rendered according to unwrit-
ten custom preserved only within a small group of learned patricians. The
Twelve Tables were not a reform or a liberalizing of old custom; they
recognized the prerogatives of the patrician class and of the patriarchal
family, the validity of enslavement for unpaid debt, and the interference
of religious custom in civil cases. Because only random quotations from
the Twelve Tables are extant, knowledge about their contents is largely
derived from references in later juridical writings. Venerated by the
Romans as a prime legal source, the Twelve Tables were superseded by
later changes in Roman law but were never formally abolished.
Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corp. U.S. movie studio. It was
Twentieth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
founder of CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY. He
MISM; SOCIOCULTURAL EVOLUTION.
Tyne and Wear
MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER; HANS ZINSSER.
typographic printing See LETTERPRESS PRINTING
typography Design or selection of letter forms to be organized into
words and sentences and printed or displayed electronically. Typography
originated after the invention of printing from movable type in the mid
15th century. The three major type families in the history of Western
printing are ROMAN, italic, and BLACK LETTER (Gothic). All had their origin in
the scripts of the calligraphers whose work was ultimately replaced by
printing. In the succeeding centuries typographers have created some
10,000 typefaces (a complete set of letter forms of a particular design).
Depending on the style of their letters, typefaces are categorized as old
style, transitional, and modern. Commonly used typefaces include Caslon,
Baskerville, Bodoni, Garamond, and Times New Roman. See also JOHN
BASKERVILLE; GIAMBATTISTA BODONI; STANLEY MORISON. The selection of a type-
face is an important part of the aesthetic process in GRAPHIC DESIGN.
tyrannosaur Any of a group of related carnivorous dinosaurs similar
to the ALLOSAURS. Tyrannosaurus rex is the largest and best known, found
as fossils in Late Cretaceous (99–65 million years ago) deposits of North
America and eastern Asia. Some adults were more than 40 ft (12 m) long
and 16–18 ft (over 5 m) tall and weighed 6 tons (5.4 metric tons) or more.
Tyrannosaurs walked with a stooped posture, carrying the body forward
and the long tail off the ground. They had a short, thick neck, a very large
skull, and pointed teeth, up to 6 in. (15 cm) long, with serrated edges.
Each small forelimb had two claws, perhaps for holding struggling prey.
A nearly complete skeleton of T. rex called “Sue” is on display at the
Field Museum in Chicago. Other tyrannosaurs include Albertosaurus,
Alectrosaurus, and Nanotyrannus.
tyrant In ancient Greece, a cruel and oppressive absolute ruler. The Greek
tyrannos was a ruler who seized power unconstitutionally or inherited such
power. Though tyrants often replaced aristocratic regimes that were them-
selves unpopular, the Greeks resented their illegal autocracy, and those
who killed tyrants received high honours. CYPSELUS and PERIANDER of Corinth
and DIONYSIUS I of Syracuse were among the most famous tyrants.
U-boat German Unterseeboot (“undersea
Uaxactún
Ugarit
SIAN, and POLISH. With the fall of the Zaporizhzhya COSSACKS in the 18th
century, Ukrainian speakers were stateless and the status of the language,
thought of as peasant speech by the nobility, was low. The language and
orthography (using a form of the CYRILLIC ALPHABET) were gradually stan-
dardized in the 19th century.
ukulele
X-ray region of the ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM.
!Umar ibn al-Kha$$)b
uncertainty principle or Heisenberg uncertainty principle
unconscious or subconscious
underground See SUBWAY
Underground See RESISTANCE
Undset
unified science or unity-of-science view In the philosophy of
force causes CENTRIPETAL ACCELERATION.
Uniform Resource Locator See URL
uniformitarianism Doctrine in geology that physical, chemical, and
biologic processes now at work on and within the Earth have operated
with general uniformity (in the same manner and with essentially the same
intensity) through immensely long periods of time and are sufficient to
account for all geologic change. In other words, the present is the key to
the past. Although the term is no longer much used, the principle, origi-
nated by JAMES HUTTON, is fundamental to geologic thinking and underlies
the whole development of the science of geology. See also CHARLES LYELL.
Unilever
UNICEF in full United Nations Children’s Fund formerly (1946–
53) United Nations International Children’s Emergency
unidentified flying object
shops are uncommon in most countries, but they are both legal and com-
mon in the U.S. and Japan. In the U.S., workers in an enterprise usually
choose, by majority vote, a single union to represent them, though in some
states RIGHT-TO-WORK LAWs prohibit requiring union membership as a con-
dition of employment, thus forbidding both the union shop and the closed
shop.
unit trust See MUTUAL FUND
Unitarianism Religious movement that stresses free use of reason in
religion, holds that God exists in only one person, and denies the divin-
ity of JESUS and the doctrine of the Holy TRINITY. Its modern roots are traced
to several liberal, radical, and rationalist thinkers of the Protestant REFOR-
MATION, who were in turn inspired by ARIUS. The mainstream of British
and American Unitarianism grew out of Calvinist PURITANISM. The scien-
tist JOSEPH PRIESTLEY was a founder of the English Unitarians, who became
a force in Parliament and were noted advocates of social reform. In the
U.S., Unitarianism developed out of New England CONGREGATIONALISM that
rejected the 18th-century revival movement. TRANSCENDENTALISM injected
Unitarianism with a new interest that attracted many more followers. See
also CALVINISM, UNIVERSALISM.
Unitas
Union Islands See TOKELAU
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (U.S.S.R.) or Soviet
SIA, TAJIKISTAN, TURKMENISTAN, UKRAINE, and UZBEKISTAN. It also contained 20
United Arab Republic (cid:2) United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland or
United Kingdom or Great Britain Island country, western Europe,
North Atlantic Ocean. It comprises GREAT BRITAIN (ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and
rulers agreed to entrust foreign relations to
Britain, but the British never assumed sov-
ereignty; each state maintained full inter-
nal control. The states formed the Trucial
States Council in 1960 and in 1971 termi-
nated defense treaties with Britain and established the six-member fed-
eration. Ra#s al-Khaymah joined it in 1972. The UAE aided coalition
forces against Iraq in the First PERSIAN GULF WAR (1991).
United Arab Republic See EGYPT
CHARLIE CHAPLIN, MAR Y PICKFORD, DOUGLAS FAIRBANKS, and D.W. GRIFFITH so that
United Automobile Workers (UAW) in full International
Union, United Automobile, Aerospace, and Agricultural
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
WALES) and NORTHERN IRELAND. Area: 93,788
sq mi (242,910 sq km). Population (2005
est.): 60,020,000. Capital: LONDON. The
population is composed of English (major
ethnic group), Scots, Irish, and Welsh and
immigrants and their descendants from India, the West Indies, Pakistan,
Bangladesh, and Africa. Languages: English (official); also Welsh, Scot-
1966 I United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (cid:2) United Mine Workers of America
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
British Sovereigns
1377–99
1399–1413
1413–22
1422–61
1461–70
1470–71
1471–83
1483–85
1483–1509
1509–1547
1547–53
1553–58
1558–1603
1603–25
1625–49
1653–58
1658–59
1660–85
1685–88
1689–17023
1702–14
1714–27
1727–60
1760–1820
1820–30
1830–37
1837–1901
1901–10
1910–36
19364
1936–52
1952–
978–1013
1013–14
925–39
939–46
946–55
955–59
959–75
975–78
802–39
839–56/58
855/56–60
860–65/66
865/66–71
871–99
899–924
Kings of Wessex
Richard II (P)
Egbert (S)
Henry IV (P:L)
Aethelwulf (S)
Henry V (P:L)
Aethelbald (S)
Henry VI (P:L)
Aethelberht (S)
Edward IV (P:Y)
Aethelred I (S)
Henry VI2
Alfred the Great (S)
Edward IV2
Edward the Elder (S)
Edward V (P:Y)
Sovereigns of England
Richard III (P:Y)
Athelstan1 (S)
Henry VII (T)
Edmund I (S)
Henry VIII (T)
Eadred (S)
Edward VI (T)
Eadwig (S)
Mary I (T)
Edgar (S)
Elizabeth I (T)
Edward the Martyr (S)
Sovereigns of Great
Ethelred II the
Britain and the
Unready (S)
United Kingdom
Sweyn Forkbeard (D)
James I (VI of 
Ethelred II the 
Scotland) (St)
Unready2 (S)
Charles I (St)
Edmund II Ironside (S)
Commonwealth
Canute (D)
Oliver Cromwell
Harold I Harefoot (D)
Richard Cromwell
Hardecanute (D)
Charles II (St)
Edward the 
James II (St)
Confessor (S)
William III &
Harold II (S)
Mary II (O/St)
William I the 
Anne (St)
Conqueror (N)
1066–87
George I (H)
William II (N)
1087–1100
George II (H)
Henry I (N)
1100–35
George III (H)
Stephen (B)
1135–54
George IV (H)
Henry II (P)
1154–89
William IV (H)
Richard I (P)
1189–99
Victoria (H)
John (P)
1199–1216
Edward VII (SCG)
Henry III (P)
1216–72
George V (W)
Edward I (P)
1272–1307
Edward VIII (W)
Edward II (P)
1307–27
George VI (W)
Edward III (P)
1327–77
Elizabeth II (W)
Dynasty or house: S=Saxon, D=Danish, N=Norman, B=Blois,
P=Plantagenet, L=Lancaster, Y=York, T=Tudor, St=Stuart, O=Orange,
H=Hanover, SCG=Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, W=Windsor
1Athelstan was king of Wessex and the first king of all England.
2restored
3William and Mary, as husband and wife, reigned jointly until Mary’s death
in 1694.
4Edward VIII succeeded on the death of his father on January 20, 1936, but
abdicated on December 11 before his coronation.
1014–16
1016–35
1035–40
1040–42
1042–66
and dependencies. With UN forces, it participated in the KOREAN WAR
(1950–53). In 1956 it intervened militarily in Egypt during the SUEZ CRI-
SIS. It joined the EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY, a forerunner of the EURO-
PEAN UNION, in 1973. In 1982 it defeated Argentina in the FALKLAND ISLANDS
WAR. As a result of continuing social strife in Northern Ireland, it joined
with Ireland in several peace initiatives, which eventually resulted in an
agreement to establish an assembly in Northern Ireland. In 1997 refer-
enda approved in Scotland and Wales devolved power to both countries,
though both remained part of the U.K. In 1991 the U.K. joined an inter-
national coalition to reverse Iraq’s conquest of Kuwait (see First PERSIAN
GULF WAR). In 2003 the U.K. and the U.S. attacked Iraq and overthrew
the government of ÍADD0M hUSSEIN (see Second PERSIAN GULF WAR). Ter-
rorist bombings in London in July 2005 killed more than 50 people.
United Mine Workers of America (UMWA) U.S. labour union.
United Nations (cid:2) United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in the later 20th century with the waning of the labour movement and the
rise of alternative sources of fuel, and by the 1990s it had fewer than
200,000 members.
United Nations (UN) International organization founded (1945) at the
end of World War II to maintain international peace and security, develop
friendly relations among nations on equal terms, and encourage interna-
tional cooperation in solving intractable human problems. A number of
its agencies have been awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace, and the UN
was the corecipient, with KOFI ANNAN, of the prize in 2001. The term
originally referred to the countries that opposed the Axis powers. An
U.N. Member States
1945 Argentina, Belarus, Brazil, Chile, China, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, France, Haiti, Iran, Lebanon, Luxembourg,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Russian
Federation3, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom, United
States of America, Yugoslavia, Greece, India, Peru, Australia, Costa Rica,
Liberia, Colombia, Mexico, S. Africa, Canada, Ethiopia, Panama, Bolivia,
Venezuela, Guatemala, Norway, Netherlands, Honduras, Uruguay,
Ecuador, Iraq, Belgium
1946 Afghanistan, Iceland, Sweden, Thailand
Pakistan, Yemen6
Burma (Myanmar)
Israel
Indonesia
1955 Albania, Austria, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Finland, Hungary, Ireland, Italy,
Jordan, Laos, Libya, Nepal, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Sri Lanka
1956 Morocco, Sudan, Tunisia, Japan
1957 Ghana, Malaysia
1958 Guinea
Benin, Upper Volta (Burkina Faso), Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ivory Coast, Cyprus,
Gabon, Madagascar, Niger, Somalia, Togo, Mali, Senegal, Nigeria
Sierra Leone, Mauritania, Mongolia, Tanzania5
Burundi, Jamaica, Rwanda, Trinidad and Tobago, Algeria, Uganda
1963 Kuwait, Kenya
1964 Malawi, Malta, Zambia
1965 Gambia, Maldives, Singapore
1966 Guyana, Botswana, Lesotho, Barbados
1968 Mauritius, Swaziland, Equatorial Guinea
Bahrain, Bhutan, Qatar, Oman, United Arab Emirates
Bahamas, Germany2
Bangladesh, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau
1975 Cape Verde, Mozambique, São Tome and Principe, Papua New Guinea,
Comoros, Suriname
Seychelles, Angola, Samoa
1977 Djibouti, Vietnam
Solomon Islands, Dominica
Saint Lucia
Zimbabwe, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
1981 Vanuatu, Belize, Antigua and Barbuda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Brunei Darussalam
1990 Namibia, Liechtenstein
Estonia, N. Korea, S. Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
1992 Armenia, Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, San Marino, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Slovenia, Georgia
1993 Czech Republic1, Slovakia1, Macedonia4, Eritrea, Monaco, Andorra
Palau
1999 Kiribati, Nauru, Tonga
Tuvalu
East Timor (Timor-Leste), Switzerland
1 Czechoslovakia was an original member from 1945. The Czech Republic
and the Slovak Republic obtained separate memberships in 1992.
2 E. Germany and W. Germany were admitted as separate members in
1973; the two countries reunified in 1990.
3 The seat held by the Soviet Union, a member from 1945, was assumed by
Russia in 1991.
4Macedonia is referred to in the U.N. as “The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia” pending settlement of a dispute over its name.
5 Tanganyika, a member from 1961, merged in 1964 with Zanzibar, a
member from 1963, to form the new country of Tanzania.
6N. Yemen, a member from 1947, merged in 1990 with S. Yemen, a mem-
ber from 1967.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
international organization was discussed at the YALTA CONFERENCE in Feb-
ruary 1945, and the UN charter was drawn up two months later at the UN
Conference on International Organization. The UN has six principal
organs: the Economic and Social Council, the UNITED NATIONS GENERAL
ASSEMBLY, the INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE, the SECRETARIAT, the UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL, and the UNITED NATIONS TRUSTEESHIP COUNCIL. It also
has 14 specialized agencies—some inherited from its predecessor, the
LEAGUE OF NATIONS (e.g., the INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION)—and a
United Nations Children’s Fund See UNICEF
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD) Organ of the UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY, created in
1964 to promote international trade. Its highest policy-making body, the
Conference, meets every four years; when the Conference is not in ses-
sion, the organization is run by its executive body, the Trade and Devel-
opment Board. UNCTAD’s principal functions include the promotion of
trade between countries in different stages of development and with dif-
ferent economic systems, initiation of negotiations for trade agreements,
and the formulation of international trade policies. In the late 20th and
early 21st centuries, UNCTAD’s efforts were directed toward the prob-
lems created in developing countries by economic globalization, and spe-
cial attention was given to measures to help the poorest and least-
developed countries become integrated into the world economy.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) UN orga-
nization formed in 1965 to promote environmentally sustainable human
development in low-income countries. Based in New York City, the
UNDP is headed by an administrator who oversees a 36-member Execu-
tive Board representing both developing and developed countries. Recent
programs have focused on reducing poverty, developing strategies to treat
and combat the spread of HIV/AIDS, promoting environmentally sound
energy and economic policies, and expanding communications and tech-
nology infrastructure. UNDP resident representatives in more than 125
developing countries help to coordinate the local activities of other UN
agencies and programs, as well as those of nongovernmental organiza-
tions.
United Nations General Assembly One of six principal compo-
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Office of
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitar-
ian Affairs (OCHA) formerly (1972–92) Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator,
Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs Agency of the
(1992–98) United
UNITED NATIONS SECRETARIAT, established in 1972 to coordinate international
relief to countries struck by natural or other disaster. Responding to
requests from stricken states for disaster assistance, the OCHA directs UN
1968 I United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (cid:2) United States
assistance and mobilizes aid from nongovernmental organizations such as
the International Red Cross. Since the 1980s it has emphasized disaster
preparedness and prevention, and it has assisted in executing projects of
the UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME.
U.S. Presidents and Vice Presidents
President
Vice president
United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration
Administrative body (1943–47) for an extensive social-welfare program
for war-ravaged nations. It distributed relief supplies and services, includ-
ing shelter, food, and medicine, and helped with agricultural and economic
rehabilitation. Its functions were later taken over by the INTERNATIONAL
REFUGEE ORGANIZATION, the WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, and UNICEF.
United Nations Resolution 242 Resolution of the UNITED NATIONS
United Nations Security Council Division of the UNITED NATIONS
United Nations Trusteeship Council One of the main organs of
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
George Washington
John Adams
Thomas Jefferson
1789–97
1797–1801
1801–9
James Madison
James Monroe
John Quincy Adams
Andrew Jackson
1809–17
1817–25
1825–29
1829–37
Martin Van Buren
1837–41
William Henry Harrison 1841*
John Tyler
1841–45
James K. Polk
1845–49
Zachary Taylor
1849–50*
Millard Fillmore
1850–53
Franklin Pierce
1853–57
James Buchanan
1857–61
Abraham Lincoln
1861–65*
Andrew Johnson
Ulysses S. Grant
1865–69
1869–77
John Adams
Thomas Jefferson
Aaron Burr
George Clinton
George Clinton
Elbridge Gerry
Daniel D. Tompkins
John C. Calhoun
John C. Calhoun
Martin Van Buren
Richard M. Johnson
John Tyler
1789–97
1797–1801
1801–5
1805–9
1809–12*
1813–14*
1817–25
1825–29
1829–32**
1833–37
1837–41
George Mifflin Dallas
Millard Fillmore
1845–49
1849–50
William Rufus de Vane King 1853*
John C. Breckinridge
1857–61
Hannibal Hamlin
1861–65
Andrew Johnson
Schuyler Colfax
Henry Wilson
William A. Wheeler
Chester A. Arthur
Rutherford B. Hayes
James A. Garfield
Chester A. Arthur
Grover Cleveland
Benjamin Harrison
Grover Cleveland
William McKinley
Theodore Roosevelt
William Howard Taft
Woodrow Wilson
Warren G. Harding
Calvin Coolidge
Herbert Hoover
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Harry S. Truman
Dwight D. Eisenhower
John F. Kennedy
Lyndon B. Johnson
Richard M. Nixon
Gerald R. Ford
Jimmy Carter
Ronald Reagan
George Bush
William J. Clinton
George W. Bush
1901–9
1909–13
1913–21
1921–23*
1923–29
1929–33
1933–45*
1877–81
1881*
1881–85
1885–89
Thomas A. Hendricks
1889–93
Levi Parsons Morton
1893–97
Adlai E. Stevenson
1897–1901* Garret A. Hobart
Theodore Roosevelt
Charles Warren Fairbanks
James Schoolcraft Sherman
Thomas R. Marshall
Calvin Coolidge
Charles G. Dawes
Charles Curtis
John Nance Garner
Henry A. Wallace
Harry S. Truman
Alben W. Barkley
Richard M. Nixon
Lyndon B. Johnson
Hubert H. Humphrey
Spiro T. Agnew
Gerald R. Ford
Nelson A. Rockefeller
Walter F. Mondale
George Bush
Dan Quayle
Albert Gore
Richard B. Cheney
1974–77
1977–81
1981–89
1989–93
1993–2001
2001–
1945–53
1953–61
1961–63*
1963–69
1969–74**
1869–73
1873–75*
1877–81
1885*
1889–93
1893–97
1897–99*
1905–9
1909–12*
1913–21
1921–23
1925–29
1929–33
1933–41
1941–45
1949–53
1953–61
1961–63
1965–69
1969–73**
1973–74
1974–77
1977–81
1981–89
1989–93
1993–2001
2001–
*Died in office.
**Resigned from office.
highest point is Alaska’s Mount MCKINLEY; within the conterminous states
it is Mount WHITNEY, Calif. Chief rivers are the MISSISSIPPI system, the
COLORADO, the COLUMBIA, and the RIO GRANDE. The GREAT LAKES, the GREAT
JAMESTOWN, Va. (1607); PLYMOUTH, Mass. (1620); Maryland (1634); and
Pennsylvania (1681). The English took New York, New Jersey, and Dela-
ware from the Dutch in 1664, a year after English noblemen had begun
to colonize the Carolinas. The British defeat of the French in 1763 (see
FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR) assured Britain political control over its 13 colo-
nies. Political unrest caused by British colonial policy culminated in the
AMERICAN REVOLUTION (1775–83) and the DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE
United States (cid:2) United States Marine Corps
1949. The Department of the Air Force is headquartered at the PENTAGON.
Separate operating agencies of the Air Force include the Air Force
Reserve, the Air Force Intelligence Service, and the U.S. AIR FORCE ACAD-
EMY. In 2000 there were over 350,000 Air Force personnel on active duty.
United States Air Force Academy Institution for the training of
United States Courts of Appeals In the U.S., the intermediate
appellate courts included in the federal judicial system and created by act
of Congress. There are 13 courts of appeal, including 12 courts whose
jurisdictions are geographically apportioned, and the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Federal Circuit, whose jurisdiction is subject-oriented and
nationwide. The Federal Circuit court, located in Washington, D.C., was
created by an act of Congress in 1982 and hears appeals from U.S. dis-
trict and territorial courts primarily in patent and trademark cases, though
it also hears appeals in cases in which the United States or its agencies is
a defendant, as in alleged breaches of contract or in tax disputes. The
courts are empowered to review the decisions of federal district courts
(see UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT), as well as the decisions of the divisions
of the U.S. Tax Court within their jurisdictions and those of the U.S.
Bankruptcy Courts. All decisions of the courts are subject to review by
the SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES.
United States, Bank of the See BANK OF THE U.S.
United States Air Force (USAF) Major component of the U.S. mili-
tary organization, with primary responsibility for AIR WARFARE, air defense,
and military space research. It also provides air services in coordination
with the other military branches. U.S. military activities in the air began
with army use of balloons for reconnaissance during the Civil War and
the Spanish-American War; in 1907 the Aeronautical Division of the Sig-
nal Corps was created. In 1920 the Army Reorganization Act created the
Air Service (after 1926, Air Corps) as a unit of the Army; in 1941 it
became the Army Air Forces. In 1947 the independent U.S. Air Force was
created and became part of the newly created Department of Defense in
United States District Court In the U.S., any of the 94 trial courts
of general jurisdiction in the federal judicial system. Each state, as well
as the District of Columbia and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, has
at least one federal district court. Each court has at least one district judge
and can have more than a score of them, as well as a clerk, a U.S. attor-
ney, a U.S. marshal, one or more U.S. magistrates, bankruptcy judges,
probation officers, and other staff. Decisions of the district courts are nor-
mally subject to appeal, typically to the UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS for
the region in which the district court is located.
United States Marine Corps (USMC) Separate military service
within the U.S. Department of the Navy (see U.S. NAVY), charged with
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
1972 I United States Military Academy (cid:2) Universal Time
United States Military Academy known as West Point Institu-
ROBERT E. LEE, STONEWALL JACKSON, JEFFERSON DAVIS, JOHN PERSHING, DWIGHT D.
EISENHOWER, DOUGLAS MACARTHUR, OMAR BRADLEY, and GEORGE PATTON.
United States Naval Academy known as Annapolis Institution
TER NIMITZ, WILLIAM F. HALSEY, JR., A.A. MICHELSON, HYMAN RICKOVER, JIMMY
Unity (School of Christianity) Religious movement founded in
unity-of-science view See UNIFIED SCIENCE
Universal Declaration of Human Rights Declaration adopted by
ORGANIZATIONs such as AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL.
Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) Organi-
Universal Resource Locator See URL
Universal Serial Bus See USB
Universal Time Mean (solar) time of the Greenwich meridian (0° lon-
gitude). Universal Time replaced the designation GREENWICH MEAN TIME in
1928; since 1972 it has been based on international atomic time, a uni-
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
FORCE, the ELECTROMAGNETIC FORCE, and GRAVITATION. Numerous theories have
been proposed for the origin and structure of the universe. See also BIG
BANG; COSMOLOGY; EXPANDING UNIVERSE; STEADY-STATE THEOR Y.
uracil
Urbino majolica
excreted. See also HEMATURIA; URINALYSIS; URINAR Y SYSTEM; URINATION.
Urmia,
Persian
Dary)cheh-ye
Or)miyyeh
Ürümqi
Uttar Pradesh
V-1 missile or flying bomb or buzz bomb German MISSILE of
dhas, those who were born as humans to propagate the DHARMA. Though
without canonical basis, Vairocana holds a special place in Tibetan BUD-
DHISM and has a special role in the AVATAMSAKA-SUTRA, in which he is the
solar buddha who is both the ultimate reality of the cosmos and the one
who pervades its component parts.
Vaisheshika
Valencia, Lake formerly Tacarigua
validity In LOGIC, the property of an argument consisting in the fact that
the truth of the premises logically guarantees the truth of the conclusion.
Whenever the premises are true, the conclusion must be true, because of
the form of the argument. Some arguments that fail to be valid are accept-
able on grounds other than formal logic (e.g., inductively strong argu-
ments), and their conclusions are supported with less than logical
necessity. Where the support yields high probability of the conclusion
relative to the premises, such arguments are sometimes called inductively
valid. In other purportedly persuasive arguments, the premises actually
provide no rational grounds for accepting the conclusion; such defective
forms of argument are called fallacies (see FALLACY, FORMAL AND INFORMAL).
valine
1984 I
value-added tax (cid:2) Van Cortlandt
VAT. See also REGRESSIVE TAX.
A globe valve controls the flow of a fluid through a pipe, inlet, or outlet. To stop the
flow completely, the threaded stem is turned to lower a sealing gasket onto the seat.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
COURTESY OF UNIVERSAL PICTURES; PHOTOGRAPH, THE
BETTMANN ARCHIVE
Bela Lugosi with Frances Dade in Drac-
ula (1931).
Van de Graaff, Robert J(emison) (b. Dec. 20, 1901, Tuscaloosa,
Ala., U.S.—d. Jan. 16, 1967, Boston, Mass.) U.S. physicist. He worked as
an engineer, then as a physics researcher at the University of Oxford (1925–
29). From 1931 he continued his research at MIT, as a professor (1934–60).
He developed a high-voltage electrostatic generator (later called the Van de
Graaff generator) that served as a type of PARTICLE ACCELERATOR. In 1946 he
cofounded the High Voltage Engineering Corp. to manufacture his accel-
erator. Widely used in atomic research, the device was also adapted to pro-
duce high-energy X rays for medical and industrial uses.
van de Velde, Henri See Henri van de VELDE
van de Velde, Willem, the Elder See Willem van de VELDE THE ELDER
van der Goes, Hugo See Hugo van der GOES
van der Rohe, Ludwig Mies See Ludwig MIES VAN DER ROHE
van der Waals
Vancouver
vapor lamp See ELECTRIC DISCHARGE LAMP
vaporization Conversion of a substance from the LIQUID or SOLID phase
into the gaseous (see GAS), or vapour, phase. It includes boiling, in which
vapour bubbles form in a liquid, and SUBLIMATION, in which a solid is con-
verted directly to vapour. Vaporization requires that HEAT (the substance’s
LATENT HEAT of vaporization) be supplied to the liquid or solid; the same
amount of heat is released by the substance in CONDENSATION, the reverse
of vaporization. If the surroundings do not supply enough heat, the tem-
perature of the remaining substance undergoing vaporization drops. See
also EVAPORATION.
Varanasi
variation In music, basic technique consisting of changing the music
melodically, harmonically, or contrapuntally. The simplest variation type
is the variation set, in which two or more sections are based on the same
musical material, which is treated with different variational techniques in
each section. The practice, originally involving use of a repeated bass line
(basso ostinato, or ground bass), began in early 16th-century dance music
in Italy and Spain. Ground-bass forms include the chaconne and passa-
caglia, both of which usually employ a brief bass line repeated many
times. In the 17th century, organ and harpsichord variations became a
standard form in Germany. Keyboard variations in the 19th century often
employed popular tunes or opera melodies; variation form was also com-
monly used in symphonies, quartets, and sonatas. It declined in impor-
tance after the classical era but has never ceased to be employed by
composers. The music of certain non-Western cultures also uses varia-
tional techniques. The art music of southern India is built on the concept
of a string of pieces, each a variation on a given “theme.” A somewhat
different concept of multilevel variation is found in the GAMELAN (orches-
tra) music of Indonesia. The variations are not consecutive but are simul-
taneous, a technique called heterophony.
varicella See CHICKEN POX
varicose
Vasconcelos
13th century by Pope Nicholas III. NICHOLAS V founded the Vatican
Library. Under JULIUS II, Giovanni dei Dolci built the SISTINE CHAPEL, noted
for its spectacular interior artwork including MICHELANGELO’s ceiling;
DONATO BRAMANTE completed the palace’s northern facade and planned the
immense Belvedere court; and RAPHAEL painted his masterpieces in the
palace. Antonio DA SANGALLO THE YOUNGER, employed by PAUL III, designed
the Sala Regia (Royal Hall) and Pauline Chapel, decorated by Michelan-
gelo. Several chapels, along with Ottaviano Mascherino’s famous Gallery
of Maps, date from the late 16th century. Domenico Fontana added a wing
of apartments and the present library building under SIXTUS V. In the
Baroque period, Urban VIII built the Matilda Chapel and, under Alex-
ander VII, GIAN LORENZO BERNINI built the Scala Regia (Royal Stairway).
Vatnajökull
Reuther board, a type of springboard, is placed in front of the near end of
the apparatus. The gymnast runs, gathers momentum while nearing the
apparatus, rebounds off the springboard, and, supporting the hands on the
apparatus, vaults over it and performs an acrobatic maneuver.
Vavilov
Vedanta
Velde
HEPPLEWHITE, and THOMAS SHERATON used mahogany and satinwood veneers.
By the mid-19th century mechanical saws allowed the veneering process
to be used in mass production to cover defects in cheap furniture.
Venera
Venice Biennale
Veracruz
Verga
vernier
also established the LEAGUE OF NATIONS, the INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZA-
TION, and the Permanent Court of International Justice (later the INTERNA-
TIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE). See also FOURTEEN POINTS.
vertebral
Vespucci
viburnum
Victoria Falls See IGUAZÚ FALLS
Victoria Island Second largest
island of the ARCTIC ARCHIPELAGO,
NORTHWEST TERRITORIES and the territory of NUNAVUT.
vicuña
board or is a separate circuit board, but is sometimes built into the com-
puter display unit. It contains a digital-to-analog module, as well as
MEMOR Y chips that store display data. All video cards (also known as video
adapters, video boards, and video controllers) adhere to a display stan-
dard, such as SVGA or XGA.
videocassette recorder See VCR
videodisc Rigid circular plate of either metal or plastic used to record
video and audio signals for playback. It resembles a phonograph record
and can be played on a machine attached to a conventional television
receiver. There are two major classes of videodiscs, magnetic and non-
magnetic. Magnetic videodiscs have an oxide-coated surface onto which
input signals are recorded as magnetic patterns in spiral tracks. Nonmag-
netic videodiscs use either a mechanical recording system analogous to
that used in phonograph records, or optical technology that uses a laser
to read data coded as a sequence of pits on the disc. The most common
type of videodisc today is the DVD.
videotape Magnetic tape used to record visual images and sound, or
the recording itself. There are two types of videotape recorders, the trans-
verse (or quad) and the helical. The transverse unit uses four heads rotat-
ing on an axis perpendicular to the direction in which the tape is fed. The
transverse format achieves 1,500-in.-per-minute head-to-tape speed, nec-
essary for high picture quality. The helical unit uses tape traveling around
a drum in the form of a helix. VCRS use a helical format, known as VHS
(Video Home System), consisting of two helical bands and tape 1/2 in.
(1 cm) wide.
Vidor
ments from the north. The Viet Cong’s guerrilla war against the South
Vietnamese government and its powerful U.S. allies was successful; the
U.S. withdrew its troops from Vietnam between 1969 and 1973, and the
PRG assumed power in South Vietnam in 1975, following a full-scale
invasion. It became part of a National United Front the following year.
Viet Minh
dancer and choreographer. He studied dance with his father and toured in
Spain (1788) and Vienna (1793–95, 1799–1803), where he began to cho-
reograph works in a style synthesizing dance and mime, similar to JEAN-
GEORGES NOVERRE’s ballet d’action, which he called “coreodramma.” He
created more than 40 works, including The Creatures of Prometheus
(1801), Gli strelizzi (1809), Otello (1818), and The Titans (1819). In 1811
he became ballet master at La Scala in Milan, where he promoted the
development of ballet in Italy.
Vigée-Lebrun
Villahermosa
was captured at sea by Barbary pirates but escaped. In 1625 he founded
the Congregation of the Mission (also called Lazarists or Vincentians) in
Paris as a preaching and teaching order. He also established the Confra-
ternities of Charity, associations of laywomen who nursed the sick. With
St. Louise de Marillac he cofounded the Daughters of Charity (Sisters of
Charity of St. Vincent de Paul).
Vincent of Beauvais
Viracocha
Virgo
INGTON’s MOUNT VERNON, THOMAS JEFFERSON’s MONTICELLO, Civil War
Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions (1788–89) Measures passed
by the legislatures of Virginia and Kentucky as a protest against the ALIEN
AND SEDITION ACTS. Drafted by JAMES MADISON and THOMAS JEFFERSON (though
PLYMOUTH COMPANY.
Virginia Declaration of Rights Measure adopted by the colony of
Virginia (June 12, 1776). Drafted by GEORGE MASON, it stated that “all
dichotomy between DEONTOLOGICAL ETHICS and CONSEQUENTIALISM: It agrees
with consequentialism that the criterion of an action’s being morally right
or wrong lies in its relation to an end that has intrinsic value, but more
closely resembles deontological ethics in its view that morally right
actions are constitutive of the end itself and not mere instrumental means
to the end. See also EUDAEMONISM.
Virunga
(1948), Senso (1954), Rocco and His Brothers (1960), The Leopard (1963,
Golden Palm), The Damned (1969), and Death in Venice (1971). As a
stage director, he introduced to Italy works by JEAN COCTEAU, ARTHUR MILLER,
and TENNESSEE WILLIAMS, and he staged operas starring MARIA CALLAS that
combined realism and spectacle.
viscosity
vitamin E or tocopherol
vizier
voir dire
Volga Tatar language See TATAR LANGUAGE
Volgograd formerly (until 1925) Tsaritsyn (1925–61) Stalingrad
City (pop., 2001 est.: 982,900), southwestern Russia. Located on the
VOLGA RIVER, it was founded as the fortress of Tsaritsyn in 1589. During
the RUSSIAN CIVIL WAR (1918–20), JOSEPH STALIN organized the city’s defense
against the White Russian armies, and it was later renamed in his honour.
During World War II it was reduced to rubble in the Battle of STALINGRAD;
it was rebuilt in the postwar era. Its manufactures include steel and alu-
minum, engineering products, timber goods, building materials, and food-
stuffs. A major railroad junction and river port, it is the eastern terminus
of the Volga-Don Ship Canal.
Volhynia
He kept up an immense correspondence and took an interest in any cases
of injustice, especially those resulting from religious prejudice. Voltaire
is remembered as a crusader against tyranny and bigotry and is noted for
his wit, satire, and critical capacity.
Volturno River
from using literacy tests to determine eligibility to vote. Later laws pro-
hibited literacy tests in all states and made poll taxes illegal in state and
local elections.
Voto, Bernard De See Bernard DE VOTO
Vouet
Vyshinsky
Waals, Johannes Diederik van der See Johannes D. VAN DER
WAALS
Wabash
century his undoubted musical stature was challenged somewhat by the
strongly racist and anti-Semitic views expressed in his writings, and evi-
dence of anti-Semitism in his operas was increasingly documented.
Wagner
ing that a business or private property “affected with a public interest”
was subject to governmental regulation.
Waitemata
entered the Austrian foreign service
and served successively as ambassa-
dor to Canada (1958–60) and the UN
(1964–68, 1970–71) and as foreign
minister (1968–70). Elected to suc-
ceed U THANT as UN secretary-
general, he served two terms, during
which he oversaw disaster relief in
Bangladesh, Nicaragua, and Guate-
mala and peacekeeping missions in
Cyprus,
the Middle East, Angola,
and Guinea. Denied a third term, he
returned to Austria and ran for presi-
dent in 1986. His candidacy became
controversial when it was learned
that he had been a member of the
Nazi Party and had served in a Ger-
man army unit
that had deported
most of the Jewish population of the
Greek town of Salonika to Nazi
death camps in 1943. Elected nonetheless, he was diplomatically isolated
throughout his term (1986–92).
Wales Welsh Cymru
RETAINING WALL, SHEAR WALL.
YORK STOCK EXCHANGE, the AMERICAN STOCK EXCHANGE, and the Federal
wallaby
Wallace, Henry A(gard) (b. Oct. 7, 1888, Adair county, Iowa,
U.S.—d. Nov. 18, 1965, Danbury, Conn.) U.S. politician. An agricultural
expert, he succeeded his father as editor of Wallace’s Farmer (1924–33).
In 1932 he helped FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT win Iowa. As U.S. secretary of
agriculture (1933–40), he shaped the administration’s farm policy, includ-
ing the AGRICULTURAL ADJUSTMENT ADMINISTRATION. He served as vice presi-
Wallace, Mike orig. Myron
wallaroo
Hand-printed wallpaper by Jean-
Baptiste Réveillon, c. 1780–90; in the
Victoria and Albert Museum, London.
COURTESY OF THE VICTORIA AND ALBERT MUSEUM,
LONDON; PHOTOGRAPH, THE COOPER-BRIDGEMAN
LIBRARY, LONDON
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Wallis (cid:2) Walpole
Walnut Canyon National Monument National monument,
north-central Arizona, U.S. Established in 1915 and covering an area of
3 sq mi (8 sq km), it preserves more than 300 pre-Columbian dwellings
built by the PUEBLO INDIANS in shallow caves on the canyon walls. Main
occupancy was from AD 1000 to 1200.
Walpole, Horace, 4th earl of Orford orig. Horatio Walpole
Walpole, Sir Hugh (Sey-
Horace Walpole, detail of an oil paint-
ing by Sir Joshua Reynolds, 1757; in
the City of Birmingham Museum and
Art Gallery, England.
COURTESY OF BIRMINGHAM MUSEUMS AND ART GALLERY
mour) (b. March 13, 1884, Auckland, N.Z.—d. June 1, 1941, near
Keswick, Cumberland, Eng.) British novelist, critic, and dramatist. A natu-
ral storyteller, Walpole turned to writing and reviewing books after unsuc-
cessful attempts at teaching and lay reading in the Anglican church.
Among his important novels is the semiautobiographical series that
includes Jeremy (1919), Jeremy and Hamlet (1923), and Jeremy at Crale
(1927). The Herries Chronicle, about an English country family, com-
prises Rogue Herries (1930), Judith Paris (1931), The Fortress (1932),
and Vanessa (1933). He also wrote critical works on ANTHONY TROLLOPE,
WALTER SCOTT, and JOSEPH CONRAD.
Walpole, Robert, 1st earl of Orford (b. Aug. 26, 1676, Houghton
Robert Walpole, detail of an oil paint-
ing by Sir Godfrey Kneller, c. 1710–
15; in the National Portrait Gallery,
London.
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY,
LONDON
Walras
CHOPIN, JOHANNES BRAHMS, and JOHANN STRAUSS.
Walvis Bay Town (pop., 2001 prelim.: 40,849), west-central Namibia,
on the Atlantic Ocean. A mid-19th-century rush to exploit GUANO depos-
its on nearby islands was followed by British annexation of the bay and
the adjacent land in 1878. It was incorporated into Britain’s Cape Colony
in 1884. In 1910 it was included in the newly united South Africa. Admin-
istered as part of South West Africa (1922–77), it was then governed
directly by South Africa, which retained the enclave after Namibia
reached independence in 1990. The two countries administered the
enclave jointly from 1992 to 1994; then South Africa transferred it to
Namibia. Its harbour serves as Namibia’s chief port.
wampum Tubular shell beads assembled into strings or woven into
belts or embroidered ornaments. The ALGONQUIAN word (short for wam-
pumpeag) translates as “string of white (shell beads).” Before contact with
white settlers, Indians used wampum primarily ceremonially or in GIFT
EXCHANGEs. In the early 17th century it came to be used as money in trade
with whites, because of a shortage of European currency.
Wanaka
CHWITZ and TREBLINKA. See also HOLOCAUST.
wapiti
Ward, Barbara (Mary), Baroness Jackson (of Lodsworth)
warfare See AIR WARFARE, AMPHIBIOUS WARFARE, BIOLOGICAL WARFARE, CHEMI-
CAL WARFARE, ECONOMIC WARFARE, HOLY WAR, NAVAL WARFARE, PSYCHOLOGICAL WAR-
FARE, TOTAL WAR, TRENCH WARFARE
warfarin
2030 I Warren (cid:2) Warsaw Uprising
Warren, Harry orig. Salvatore Guaragna (b. Dec. 24, 1893,
of BUNKER HILL.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Warring States period Chinese Zhangou (475–221 BC) In Chi-
Warsaw, Duchy of or Grand Duchy of Warsaw Independent
Warsaw Pact or Warsaw Treaty Organization Military alli-
wart or verruca
coeducational in 1984. It has an undergraduate college, a law school, and
a school of commerce, economics, and politics. Among its offerings are
programs in engineering, environmental studies, and journalism.
Washington Birthplace National Monument, George See
GEORGE WASHINGTON BIRTHPLACE NATIONAL MONUMENT
Washita
Washington, Dinah orig. Ruth Lee Jones (b. Aug. 29, 1924, Tus-
test for the antibody to the spirochete that causes syphilis in 1906. That
test, along with other procedures, is still used to diagnose syphilis. He is
also noted for developing tests for tuberculosis. With Wilhelm Kolle he
wrote Handbook of Pathogenic Microorganisms (6 vol., 1903–09).
Wassermann
2034 I water moccasin (cid:2) watercress
Santa Cruz water lily (Victoria
cruziana).
GOTTLIEB HAMPFLER
water ouzel See DIPPER
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
PLUMBING.
water table or groundwater table Surface of a body of under-
Seasonal variations in groundwater levels.
© MERRIAM-WEBSTER INC.
Wateree River (cid:2) Waterton Lakes National Park
Waters, Muddy orig. McKinley Morganfield (b. April 4, 1915,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Watie
Watusi See TUTSI
Waugh
2038 I waxwing (cid:2) weathering
Wayne, John orig. Marion Michael Morrison (b. May 26, 1907,
WCTU See WOMAN’S CHRISTIAN TEMPERANCE UNION
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
weapon of mass destruction (WMD) Weapon with the capacity
Weapons Convention of 1993. See NUCLEAR WEAPON; CHEMICAL WARFARE; BIO-
LOGICAL WARFARE.
JOHN H. GERARD
Long-tailed weasel (Mustela longi-
cauda)
WARMING, GREENHOUSE EFFECT).
Webber, Andrew Lloyd See Andrew LLOYD WEBBER
Weber
Webb, Sidney (James) and Beatrice Beatrice Webb orig. Mar-
LEGE CASE, MCCULLOCH V. MAR YLAND,
from those of WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.
Lake See Lake CHARGOGGAGOGGMANCHAUGGAUGGAG-
OGGCHAUBUNAGUNGAMAUGG
Webster,
Wedekind
mental in WILLIAM SEWARD’s election as governor (1838) and in the presi-
dential election of WILLIAM H. HARRISON (1840). He later became active in
the Republican Party and was a staunch supporter of Pres. ABRAHAM LIN-
COLN. In 1861 he was sent to England to seek support for the Union.
Weelkes
Weights and Measurements1 (British Imperial System/U.S. Customary System)
ABBREVIATION
OR SYMBOL
EQUIVALENTS IN OTHER UNITS
OF SAME SYSTEM
METRIC EQUIVALENT
short ton
long ton
hundredweight
short hundredweight
long hundredweight
pound
ounce
grain
pound
ounce
pennyweight
grain
pound
ounce
scruple
grain
gallon
quart
fluid ounce
fluid dram
minim
bushel
quart
bushel
gallon
quart
fluid ounce
fluid dram
minim
square mile
square rod
square yard
square foot
square inch
cubic yard
cubic foot
cubic inch
WEIGHT
Avoirdupois2
20 short hundredweight, 2000 pounds
20 long hundredweight, 2240 pounds
100 pounds, 0.05 short tons
112 pounds, 0.05 long ton
16 ounces, 7000 grains
16 drams, 437.5 grains, 0.0625 pound
27.344 grains, 0.0625 ounce
0.037 dram, 0.002286 ounce
12 ounces, 240 pennyweight, 5760 grains
20 pennyweight, 480 grains, 0.083 pound
24 grains, 0.05 ounce
0.042 pennyweight, 0.002083 ounce
Apothecaries’
12 ounces, 5760 grains
8 drams, 480 grains, 0.083 pound
3 scruples, 60 grains
20 grains, 0.333 dram
0.05 scruple, 0.002083 ounce, 0.0166 dram
CAPACITY
U.S. liquid measure
5280 feet, 1760 yards, 320 rods
5.50 yards, 16.5 feet
3 feet, 36 inches
12 inches, 0.333 yard
0.083 foot, 0.028 yard
640 acres, 102,400 square rods
4840 square yards, 43,560 square feet
30.35 square yards, 0.00625 acre
1296 square inches, 9 square feet
144 square inches, 0.111 square yard
0.0069 square foot, 0.00077 square yard
VOLUME
27 cubic feet, 46,656 cubic inches
1728 cubic inches, 0.0370 cubic yard
0.00058 cubic foot, 0.000021 cubic yard
lb or lb avdp also #
oz or oz avdp
dr or dr avdp
dwt also pwt
lb ap
oz ap
dr ap
fl oz
fl dr
fl oz
fl dr
ft or ‘
in or “ 
sq mi or mi2
sq rd or rd2
sq yd or yd2
sq ft or ft2
sq in or in2
cu yd or yd3
cu ft or ft3
cu in or in3
0.907 metric ton 
1.016 metric ton 
45.359 kilograms 
50.802 kilograms 
0.454 kilogram 
28.350 grams 
1.772 grams 
0.0648 gram 
0.373 kilogram 
31.103 grams 
1.555 grams 
0.0648 gram 
0.373 kilogram 
31.103 grams 
3.888 grams 
1.296 grams 
0.0648 gram 
3.785 liters 
0.946 liter 
473.176 milliliters 
118.294 milliliters 
29.573 milliliters 
3.697 milliliters 
0.061610 milliliter 
35.239 liters 
8.810 liters 
1.101 liters 
0.551 liter 
36.369 liters 
9.092 liters 
4.546 liters 
1.136 liters 
568.26 milliliters 
142.066 milliliters 
28.412 milliliters 
3.5516 milliliters 
0.059194 milliliter 
1.609 kilometers 
5.029 meters 
0.9144 meter 
30.48 centimeters 
2.54 centimeters 
2.590 square kilometers 
0.405 hectare, 4047 square meters 
25.293 square meters 
0.836 square meter 
0.093 square meter 
6.452 square centimeters 
0.765 cubic meter 
0.028 cubic meter 
16.387 cubic centimeters
1For U.S. equivalents of the metric unit see Metric System table.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
2The U.S. uses the avoirdupois units as a common system of measuring weight.
Weimar Republic
Welles
poor (see MEDICARE AND MEDICAID).
SURPLUS; VILFREDO PARETO.
Welfare Island See ROOSEVELT ISLAND
Welfare Party See REFAH PARTY
as the RAILWAY EXPRESS AGENCY and its foreign express business by AMERI-
CAN EXPRESS CO. Its security services still exist under the name Wells Fargo
Armored Service Corp., a subsidiary of Baker Industries. The Wells Fargo
Bank’s holding company, Wells Fargo & Co., was established in 1968.
Headquartered in San Francisco, the bank has subsidiaries and affiliates
worldwide. In 1998 Wells Fargo & Co. merged with Norwest Corp.
Welsh corgi
Wells, Ida B(ell) or Ida Bell Wells-Barnett (b. July 16, 1862,
Wells, Kitty orig. Muriel Ellen Deason (b. Aug. 30, 1919, Nash-
LORETTA LYNN.
Wenceslas
followers as WASHINGTON ALLSTON, GILBERT STUART, CHARLES WILLSON PEALE,
Wesley (cid:2) West Indies
West, Nathanael orig. Nathan Weinstein (b. Oct. 17, 1903, New
York, N.Y., U.S.—d. Dec. 22, 1940, near El Centro, Calif.) U.S. writer.
He attended Brown University and was supporting himself as a hotel
manager, giving free or low-rent rooms to struggling fellow writers, when
he wrote the novella Miss Lonelyhearts (1933), about an advice colum-
nist whose attempts to solace his correspondents end in ironic defeat. A
Cool Million (1934) mocks the American dream as popularized by HOR-
ATIO ALGER. His last novel, The Day of the Locust (1939), depicts the sav-
agery lurking beneath the Hollywood dream. Though not widely read until
after his death in an auto accident at age 37, West is now considered a
major American novelist.
West, Dame Rebecca orig. Cicily Isabel Fairfield (b. Dec. 21,
West Atlantic languages See ATLANTIC LANGUAGES
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
BONAPARTE and EXMOUTH gulfs. AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINAL peoples have occu-
Western Dvina River Russian Zapadnaya
JAMAICA, HISPANIOLA (HAITI and the DOMINICAN REPUBLIC), and PUERTO RICO; the
West Point See UNITED STATES MILITAR Y ACADEMY
West River See XI RIVER
Western Ontario, University
of Public university in London,
Ontario, Canada, founded in 1878. It
has faculties of applied health sci-
ences, arts, business administration,
dentistry,
education,
engineering,
graduate studies,
journalism,
library science, medicine, music,
nursing, science, and social science
as well as a graduate school of jour-
nalism.
Western Reserve Tract of land,
northeastern Ohio, U.S. Located on
the southern shore of Lake ERIE, it
formed part of the western lands of
Connecticut not surrendered to Congress in 1786. It covered about
3,500,000 ac (1,417,500 ha) and was sold in part to immigrants from
Connecticut (1786–1800). Ceded in 1800 to Ohio, it was later divided
into several counties.
Western Sahara formerly Spanish Sahara Territory, North
Africa. Area: 97,344 sq mi (252,120 sq km). Population (2002 est.):
256,000. Capital: LAAYOUNE. Little is known of the area’s prehistory,
though rock engravings in southern locations suggest a succession of
nomadic groups. In the 4th century BC there was trade across the Medi-
terranean Sea between the region and Europe; this did not last, and there
was little European contact until the 19th century. In 1884 Spain claimed
a protectorate over the RÍO DE ORO region. Boundary agreements with
France were concluded in 1900 and 1912. Spain formally united the area’s
northern and southern parts into the overseas province of the Spanish
Sahara in 1958. In 1976 Spain relinquished its claim. The region then was
divided between Mauritania, which relinquished its claim in 1979, and
Morocco, which later occupied the whole territory. Separatists of the
POLISARIO movement, based in Algeria, declared a government-in-exile
called the Saharan Arab Democratic Republic in 1976; the issue of West-
ern Sahara’s status remained unresolved. remained unresolved.Western
Sahara has vast phosphate deposits and some potash and iron ore.
Western Samoa See SAMOA
Western Scheldt or Westerschelde
tion of the Reformed (Calvinist) Church. The Holy Roman Empire was
forced to recognize its German princes as absolute sovereigns in their own
dominions, which greatly weakened its central authority.
Wetar
down in 1245 by Henry III (except for the nave) and replaced with the
present Gothic-style abbey church. The rebuilding of the nave was begun
by 1376 and continued intermittently until Tudor times. The chapel of
Henry VII (begun c. 1503) is noted for its exquisite fan vaulting. ELIZA-
BETH I refounded the church as the Collegiate Church of St. Peter in West-
minster (1560). The western towers (1745), by Nicholas Hawksmoor and
John James, were the last addition. Every British sovereign since Will-
iam the Conqueror has been crowned in the abbey except Edward V and
Edward VIII. Many are also buried there, and it is crowded with the tombs
and memorials to other famous Britons. Part of the southern transept is
known as the Poets’ Corner, while the northern transept has memorials
to statesmen.
Westminster Confession Confession of faith of English-speaking
Presbyterians, representing a theological consensus of international CAL-
VINISM. Produced by the Westminster Assembly, it was completed in 1646
and approved by Parliament in 1648. When the monarchy was restored
in 1660, the episcopal form of church government was reinstated and the
Confession lost official status in England, but it had already been adopted
by the Church of Scotland (1647) and various other churches. Consisting
of 33 chapters, it states that the sole doctrinal authority is scripture,
restates the doctrines of the Holy TRINITY and JESUS, and gives reformed
views of the SACRAMENTS, the ministry, and GRACE. See also PRESBYTERIANISM.
Weston, Edward (b. March 24, 1886, Highland Park, Ill., U.S.—d.
Jan. 1, 1958, Carmel, Calif.) U.S.
photographer. A camera enthusiast
from boyhood, Weston began his
professional career by opening a por-
trait studio in Glendale, Calif. His
early work was in the style of the
Pictorialists, photographers who imi-
tated IMPRESSIONIST paintings. In 1915
Weston saw an exhibition of modern
art that inspired him to renounce his
former work: he began to create
sharp and realistic pictures that con-
vey the beauty of natural objects
through skillful composition and
subtleties of tone, light, and texture.
After traveling and meeting luminar-
ies such as ALFRED STIEGLITZ and DIEGO
Whewell
Wharton, Edith (Newbold) orig. Edith Newbold Jones (b.
2052 I whip-tailed ray (cid:2) White
nominee in the 1852 election, WINFIELD SCOTT, failed to win wide support
as most Southern Whigs joined the DEMOCRATIC PARTY. In 1854 most North-
ern Whigs joined the new REPUBLICAN PARTY, though some joined the KNOW-
NOTHING PARTY.
whip-tailed ray See STINGRAY
whippet Breed of HOUND dog developed in 19th-century Britain to chase
rabbits in an arena. It was developed
from TERRIERS and English and Italian
GREYHOUNDS, which it resembles. It
stands 18–22 in. (46–56 cm), weighs
about 28 lbs (13 kg), and has a
smooth coat of gray, tan, or white.
Capable of speeds up to 35 mph (56
kph), it is used for racing and for
hunting small game. It is typically
quiet and even-tempered.
Whipple, George H(oyt) (b.
Whippet
SALLY ANNE THOMPSON/EB INC.
secretary, Orville E. Babcock, was indicted but acquitted on Grant’s tes-
timony. The Republican Party allegedly received some of the illegally
held tax money.
whist Card game. It belongs to a family that includes bridge whist and
bridge, each of which developed in succession from the original game of
whist. The essential features of card games in the whist family are: four
people usually play, two against two as partners; a full 52-card deck is dealt
out evenly so that each player holds 13 cards; the object of play is to win
tricks, and win or loss is determined by the number of tricks taken (as dis-
tinct from games such as PINOCHLE, in which it is determined by the value of
card points taken in tricks). Whist originated in 17th-century England.
whistler See GOLDENEYE
Whistler, James (Abbott) McNeill (b. July 14, 1834, Lowell,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
White, James (Springer) and Ellen (Gould) orig. Ellen Gould
ADMINISTRATION. In 1946 he studied with EDWARD WESTON and ALFRED STIEG-
White, Patrick (Victor Martindale) (b. May 28, 1912, London,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
White (cid:2) White House
white blood cell See LEUKOCYTE
CHR LEDERER-BAVARIA-VERLAG
White butterfly (Pieris brassicae).
white-footed mouse See DEER MOUSE
2054 I White Lotus (cid:2) Whitman
than 100 rooms. The British burned it in 1814, but it was rebuilt and
enlarged under Hoban’s direction. In the 1820s, Hoban added eastern and
western terraces as well as a semicircular southern portico and a colon-
naded northern portico. The later addition of the West Wing (1902) and
East Wing (1942) provided additional office space. THEODORE ROOSEVELT
adopted “White House” as the building’s official name in 1902. Its pub-
lic areas are toured by about 1.5 million people every year.
White Lotus Chinese Buddhist millenarian movement that was often
persecuted because of its association with rebellion. The movement had
roots in 4th-century worship of the Buddha AMITABHA, whose devotional
cult inspired Mao Ziyuan to form the White Lotus Society, a pious veg-
etarian group of monks and laity. By the 14th century it had developed
into a millenarian sect that combined MAITREYAn and MANICHAEAN beliefs
and was active in rebellions at the end of the YUAN DYNASTY. The society
became most prominent through its role in the White Lotus Rebellion
(1786–1804), a large-scale uprising in central China that contributed to
the fall of the Qing dynasty. It was eventually put down by peasants orga-
nized into local militia defense corps. Later Chinese governments came
to use the term White Lotus for all illegal millenarian groups. Some
observers saw the NIAN REBELLION of 1852 as well as the secret society
behind the Boxer Rebellion as new manifestations of the White Lotus
Society.
White Monk See CISTERCIAN
White Mountain, Battle of (1620) Decisive battle near Prague at
the beginning of the THIRTY YEARS’ WAR. The Catholic forces of MAXIMILIAN
I, duke of Bavaria, commanded by count von TILLY, defeated the Protes-
tant forces of FREDERICK V, king of Bohemia. By the defeat, Bohemia lost
its independence, and Protestantism was exterminated until 1648.
White Mountains Segment of the APPALACHIAN MOUNTAINS. It extends
87 mi (140 km) across north-central New Hampshire and into western
Maine. Containing the highest elevations in the northeastern U.S., its
loftiest peaks, mostly 5,000–6,000 ft (1,500–1,800 m) high, occur in a
series of summits that are named for U.S. presidents and make up the
Presidential Range. The highest point is Mount WASHINGTON. Most of the
White Mountains lie within the White Mountain National Forest. It is a
popular summer and winter resort area.
White Nile See NILE RIVER
White Sands National Monument National monument, south-
white shark See GREAT WHITE SHARK
white-tailed deer or Virginia
deer Common reddish brown DEER
(Odocoileus virginianus), an impor-
tant game animal found alone or in
small groups from southern Canada
to South America. The tail, white on
the underside, is held aloft when the
deer is alarmed or running. The male
has forwardly curved antlers with
several unbranched tines. Northern
white-tailed deer grow up to 3.5 ft
(107 cm) tall and weigh up to 400 lbs
(180 kg). The white-tailed deer lives
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
White-tailed deer buck (Odocoileus
virginianus)
KARL H. MASLOWSKI
See also WHITEFISH.
Whitman, Marcus (b. Sept. 4, 1802, Rushville, N.Y., U.S.—d. Nov.
29, 1847, Waiilatpu, Oregon Territory) U.S. missionary and pioneer. A
physician and Congregational missionary, he was sent to the Oregon
region after offering his services to the American Board of Commission-
ers for Foreign Missions. In 1836 he and his wife founded a mission
among the Cayuse Indians near present-day Walla Walla, Wash. He helped
the Indians build houses and a corn-grinding mill, and his wife opened a
Walt Whitman, photograph by
Mathew Brady.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, WASHINGTON, D.C.
PABLO NERUDA, FERNANDO PESSOA, and ALLEN GINSBERG.
important AMERICAN SYSTEM OF MANUFACTURE.
Whitney, Gertrude Vanderbilt orig. Gertrude Vanderbilt (b.
Jan. 9, 1875, New York, N.Y., U.S.—d. April 18, 1942, New York City)
U.S. sculptor and art patron. Great-granddaughter of CORNELIUS VANDERBILT,
she was born to great wealth and studied sculpture in New York City and
Paris. Among her major works were the Titanic Memorial (1914–31) in
Washington, D.C., and Victory Arch (1918–19) in New York. All her works
were simple, direct, and traditional. In 1929 she offered to donate her col-
lection of about 500 works by modern American artists to the Metropolitan
Museum of Art but was refused by the traditionalist director. The next year
she founded the Whitney Museum of American Art, also in New York City,
which opened in 1931; today it is the foremost museum of American art.
Whitney, John Hay (b. Aug. 17, 1904, Ellsworth, Maine, U.S.—d.
Feb. 8, 1982, Manhasset, N.Y.) U.S. multimillionaire and sportsman. The
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Whitman (cid:2) wholesaling
Whittington, Richard known as Dick Whittington (d. March
WHO See WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
There are three major categories of wholesalers. Merchant wholesalers,
the most important category, are independent businesses that buy mer-
chandise in great quantities from manufacturers and resell it to retailers.
Manufacturers’ sales branches are businesses founded by manufacturers
to sell directly to retailers. Merchandise agents and brokers represent
various manufacturers; they usually do not buy the merchandise they
handle but instead arrange for shelf space and the display of merchandise.
So-called warehouse stores sell large quantities of goods at near-wholesale
prices. See also RETAILING.
whooping cough or pertussis Acute, very contagious childhood
disease, typically with bouts of coughing followed by a long, loud inha-
lation (whoop) and ending with mucus expulsion and often vomiting.
Caused by the bacterium Bordetella pertussis, it initially resembles a cold
with a short dry cough. Within one or two weeks, coughing bouts begin;
this phase usually lasts four to six weeks. Serious complications include
bronchopneumonia (PNEUMONIA involving the bronchi), asphyxia, seizures,
and signs of brain damage. Treatment is with antibiotics. The pertussis
vaccine is usually combined with tetanus and diphtheria toxoids as part
of routine childhood immunizations.
whooping crane Migratory North American bird (Grus americana)
and one of the world’s rarest birds,
on the verge of extinction. The tall-
est North American bird, it is almost
5 ft (150 cm) tall and has a wing-
spread of about 7 ft (210 cm). It is
white with black-tipped wings, black
legs, and a bare red face and crown.
Its shrill, whooping call can be heard
for 2 miles (3 km). Almost extermi-
nated in the early 20th century, it
became the object of intensive con-
servation efforts; by century’s end
there were still fewer than 300 wild
and captive individuals. See also
SANDHILL CRANE.
Whorf
Wiesel
2058 I Wild West Show (cid:2) Wilhelmina
Wilde, Oscar (Fingal O’Flahertie Wills) (b. Oct. 16, 1854, Dub-
COURTESY OF THE WILLIAM ANDREWS MEMORIAL LIBRARY
OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, LOS ANGELES
Oscar Wilde, 1882.
wildebeest See GNU
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
jects and his biting indictments of hypocrisy, he also directed The Lost
Weekend (1945, Academy Award), Sunset Boulevard (1950, Academy
Award for best screenplay), Stalag 17 (1953), and The Apartment (1960,
Academy Award). His acclaimed comedies include Sabrina (1954), The
Seven Year Itch (1955), Some Like It Hot (1959), and Kiss Me, Stupid
(1964).
Wilder, Laura Ingalls orig. Laura Ingalls (b. Feb. 7, 1867, Lake
VERSITY, CONSERVATION, ENDANGERED SPECIES.
Wilhelmina (Helena Pauline Maria) (b. Aug. 31, 1880, The
Hague, Neth.—d. Nov. 28, 1962, Het Loo, near Apeldoorn) Queen of The
Netherlands (1890–1948). Daughter of King WILLIAM III, she became queen
on his death, under her mother’s regency until 1898, and soon gained wide
popular approval. She helped maintain her country’s neutrality in World
War I. After Germany invaded The Netherlands in 1940, she left with her
Willemstad
Wilkins, Maurice (Hugh Frederick) (b. Dec. 15, 1916, Pongaroa,
N.Z.—d. Oct. 6, 2004, London, Eng.) New Zealand-born British bio-
physicist. Educated in Birmingham and Cambridge, he participated in the
MANHATTAN PROJECT, working on the separation of uranium isotopes for use
in the atomic bomb. On his return to Britain, he began a series of inves-
tigations that led ultimately to his studies of DNA. His X-ray diffraction
studies of DNA proved crucial to the determination of DNA’s molecular
structure by JAMES D. WATSON and FRANCIS CRICK, for which the three were
awarded a 1962 Nobel Prize. He later applied X-ray diffraction techniques
to the study of RNA. See also ROSALIND FRANKLIN.
Wilkins, Roy (b. Aug. 30, 1901, St. Louis, Mo., U.S.—d. Sept. 8, 1981,
New York, N.Y.) U.S. civil-rights leader. He was a reporter for the Afri-
can American-owned Kansas City Call and later became its managing
editor. He joined the staff of the NAACP (1931) and became editor (1934–
49) of its official publication, The Crisis. In 1955 he began a 22-year ten-
ure as executive director of the NAACP, which he set on a course of
seeking equal rights through legal redress. He helped organize the 1963
March on Washington, and he served as chairman of the U.S. delegation
to the International Conference on Human Rights in 1968.
Wilkinson, James (b. 1757, Calvert county, Md.—d. Dec. 28, 1825,
Mexico City, Mex.) American army
officer and double agent. He served in
the AMERICAN REVOLUTION under HORA-
TIO GATES and was involved in the
THOMAS CONWAY cabal. He settled in
Kentucky in 1784 and schemed to
ally the Kentucky region with Spain,
though he was in fact working
against Spain. He served as governor
of part of the Louisiana territory
(1805–06). He allegedly planned to
conquer the Mexican provinces of
Spain and conspired with AARON BURR
to establish an independent govern-
ment; when he betrayed Burr’s plan,
he was investigated but cleared. In
the War of 1812 he commanded U.S.
forces on the Canadian border, but his
campaign against Montreal failed.
Wilkinson, John (b. 1728, Clif-
ton, Cumberland, Eng.—d. July 14,
1808, Bradley, Staffordshire) British
industrialist. Known as “the great
Staffordshire ironmaster,” he found many new applications for iron, devel-
embourg (1840–49). Son of WILLIAM I, he lived in exile with his family in
England from 1795. He commanded Dutch troops in the Battle of WATER-
LOO (1815). Sent by his father to Belgium in 1830 to appease the rebels,
he failed to stop the independence movement. In 1840 he became king
of The Netherlands on his father’s abdication. As king, he helped stabi-
lize the economy. In 1848 he oversaw passage of a new liberal constitu-
tion that expanded the authority of the ministers and assembly, established
direct elections, and secured basic civil liberties.
William III Dutch Willem Hendrik (b. Nov. 14, 1650, The Hague,
United Provinces of the Netherlands—d. March 19, 1702, London, Eng.)
Stadtholder of the United Provinces of the Netherlands (1672–1702) and
king of England (1689–1702). Son of WILLIAM II, prince of Orange, and
Mary Stuart, daughter of CHARLES I of England, he was born in The Hague
soon after his father’s death. The Act of Seclusion (1654) that barred the
house of Orange from power in the United Provinces was rescinded in
1660, and William was appointed captain general and named stadtholder
by popular acclaim in 1672. He successfully defended his country against
CHARLES II of England and LOUIS XIV of France. In 1677 he married Mary
(later Queen MAR Y II), daughter of the English duke of York (later JAMES
II). In 1688 William was invited by James’s opponents to intervene against
the Catholic ruler, and he landed with a Dutch army in Devon, Eng. He
and Mary were proclaimed joint rulers of England in 1689; he ruled alone
after Mary’s death in 1694. He directed the European opposition to Louis
XIV, which eventually led to the War of the GRAND ALLIANCE after Will-
iam’s death. In Britain he secured religious toleration and strengthened
Parliament, granting independence to the judiciary in the Act of SETTLE-
MENT.
William III Dutch Willem Alexander Paul Frederik Lodewijk
MONROE, JOHN TYLER, and Gen. WINFIELD SCOTT. GEORGE WASHINGTON was the
William of Auvergne
King of The Netherlands and grand duke of Luxembourg (1815–40). Son
of William V, prince of Orange, he married in 1791 and immigrated with
his family to England after the French invasion of the Dutch Republic
(1795). He sided with Prussia against NAPOLEON and lived in exile at the
Prussian court until 1812. After the Dutch revolt against French rule, he
became sovereign prince of the Dutch Republic (1813) and king of the
United Netherlands (1815), which included Belgium, Liège, and Luxem-
bourg. He led an economic recovery program that sparked a commercial
revival, but his autocratic methods and imposition of Dutch as the offi-
cial language provoked a revolt by Belgium (1830) that led to its inde-
pendence. In 1840 he abdicated in favour of his son, WILLIAM II.
William I known as William the Lion (b. 1143—d. Dec. 2, 1214,
Stirling, Stirlingshire, Scot.) King of Scotland (1165–1214). He succeeded
his father as earl of Northumberland (1152) but was forced to relinquish
his earldom to England’s HENR Y II in 1157. He succeeded his brother, Mal-
colm IV, as king of Scotland and in 1173 joined a revolt of Henry’s sons
in an attempt to regain Northumberland. Captured in 1174, he was
released after submitting to Henry’s overlordship. He bought his release
from subjection in 1189. He continued to agitate for the restoration of
Northumberland but was forced to renounce his claim by King JOHN in
1209. William created many of the major burghs of modern Scotland.
William II or William Rufus (b. c. 1056—d. Aug. 2, 1100, near
Lyndhurst, Hampshire, Eng.) King of England (1087–1100) and de facto
duke of Normandy (1096–1100). He inherited England from his father,
WILLIAM I (the Conqueror), and quelled a rebellion (1088) by barons loyal
to his brother ROBERT II. A tyrannical ruler, he brutally punished the lead-
ers of a second revolt (1095). He forced St. ANSELM, archbishop of Can-
terbury, to leave England and seized his lands (1097). He reduced the
Scottish kings to vassals (1093), subjugated Wales (1097), and waged war
on Normandy (1089–96), gaining control when Robert mortgaged the
duchy. His death in a hunting accident may have been an assassination
ordered by his brother Henry (later HENR Y I).
William II German Friedrich Wilhelm Viktor Albert known as
William II Italian Guglielmo known as William the Good (b.
William II Dutch Willem Frederik George Lodewijk (b. Dec.
6, 1792, The Hague, United Provinces of the Netherlands—d. March 17,
1849, Tilburg, Neth.) King of The Netherlands and grand duke of Lux-
was appointed in 1231 by Pope GREGOR Y IX to a council to censor the works
of ARISTOTLE (which in 1210 had been deemed corruptive of Christianity)
included in the university’s curriculum. Seeing no reason to avoid the ratio-
nal analysis of Christian revelation, he was on the verge of reorganizing the
curriculum when he died. In his principal work, usually called the Summa
aurea (written 1215–20), he treated such matters as God’s triune nature, the
problem of human choice, and the nature of virtue.
William of Ockham See William of OCKHAM
William Rufus See WILLIAM II (ENGLAND)
William Tell See William TELL
William the Conqueror See WILLIAM I (ENGLAND)
William the Good See WILLIAM II (SICILY)
William the Silent See WILLIAM I (NETHERLANDS)
Williams, Hank orig. Hiram King Williams (b. Sept. 17, 1923,
William of Ockham (cid:2) Williams
Williams, Mary Lou orig. Mary Elfrieda Scruggs (b. May 8,
1910, Atlanta, Ga., U.S.—d. May 28, 1981, Durham, N.C.) U.S. pianist,
composer, arranger, and bandleader. A child prodigy, she had her profes-
sional debut with big bands at age 12. Beginning in 1929, Williams wrote
arrangements for many SWING bands, including those of Andy Kirk (1898–
1992) and DUKE ELLINGTON. Her 12-movement Zodiac Suite was performed
by the New York Philharmonic in 1946. A pianist with strong roots in the
BLUES and early JAZZ, Williams embraced the innovations of BEBOP and later
free jazz, performing with a diverse array of jazz musicians, including
DIZZY GILLESPIE and Cecil Taylor (b. 1933). In the 1960s and ’70s she com-
posed a number of liturgical pieces for jazz ensembles, including Music
for Peace (1970), popularly known as “Mary Lou’s Mass.”
Williams, Ralph Vaughan See Ralph VAUGHAN WILLIAMS
Williams, Ted orig. Theodore Samuel Williams (b. Aug. 30,
Williams, Tennessee orig. Thomas Lanier Williams (b. March
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Williams, Venus; and Williams, Serena (respectively b. June
KAZAN.
Wills, Helen (Newington) or Helen Wills Moody in full Helen
TILOVA.
William’s War, King See KING WILLIAM’S WAR
Wilmot Proviso
Williamsburg City (pop., 2000: 11,998), southeastern Virginia, U.S.
Located on a tidewater peninsula between the JAMES and York rivers, it
was settled in 1633 as Middle Plantation and served as a refuge from
Indian attacks. The College of WILLIAM AND MAR Y was founded there in
1693. After the burning of nearby JAMESTOWN in 1699, it became the capi-
tal of Virginia until 1780, when the capital was moved to RICHMOND. Dur-
ing the AMERICAN CIVIL WAR, Confederate forces were defeated at the Battle
of Williamsburg in 1862. Colonial Williamsburg, an extensive restoration
of several hundred colonial buildings, was begun in 1926 and became part
of the COLONIAL NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK in 1936.
Wilson, C(harles) T(homson) R(ees) (b. Feb. 14, 1869, Glencorse,
Edmund Wilson
ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
Wilson, C. (cid:2) Wilson, R.
tions caused by 20th-century human activities. In Consilience: The Unity
of Knowledge (1998) he proposed that all of existence can be organized
and understood in accordance with a few fundamental natural laws.
Wilson, (James) Harold, Baron Wilson (of Rievaulx) (b.
Wilson, Harriet E. orig. Harriet E. Adams (b. 1828?, Milford,
J.M.W. TURNER and JOHN CONSTABLE.
Wilson, Robert W(oodrow) (b. Jan. 10, 1936, Houston, Texas,
U.S.) U.S. radio astronomer. He joined Bell Laboratories in 1963 and
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
headed its Radio Physics Research Department (1976–94). With his col-
league ARNO PENZIAS, he detected the COSMIC BACKGROUND RADIATION, a dis-
covery for which the two men shared a 1978 Nobel Prize (with Pyotr
Kapitsa [1894–1984], who was honoured for research unrelated to theirs).
Wilson, Teddy orig. Theodore Shaw Wilson (b. Nov. 24, 1912,
WALLER, EARL HINES, and ART TATUM.
Wilson disease or hepatolenticular
also AERODYNAMICS.
Windermere Lake, northwestern England. Located in the southeastern
LAKE DISTRICT, it is the country’s largest lake, 10.5 mi (17 km) long and 1
mi (1.6 km) wide; its area is 6 sq mi (16 sq km). It has a maximum depth
of 219 ft (67 m). Part of the Lake District National Park, it is a popular
tourist centre.
Windhoek
2066 I windpipe (cid:2) Windward Islands
before it was renamed in 1836. With
strategic
location
opposite
Detroit, it became an industrial cen-
tre, an important railway terminus,
and a busy port in GREAT LAKES ship-
ping. Its manufactures include motor
vehicles and parts, foods and bever-
ages, and medicines. It is Canada’s
leading port of entry from the U.S.
formerly
Windsor, house of
(1901–17) House of Saxe-
Coburg-Gotha Royal house of
Britain, which succeeded the house
of HANOVER on the death of its last
monarch, Queen VICTORIA. The dynas-
tic name of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was
that of Victoria’s German-born hus-
band, Prince ALBERT. The dynasty has
included EDWARD VII, GEORGE V,
EDWARD VIII, GEORGE VI, and ELIZABETH
II. In view of the anti-German atmo-
sphere of World War I, George V pro-
claimed in 1917 that all British male
descendants of Queen Victoria would
adopt the surname of Windsor.
Windsor, Wallis Warfield,
Matching a specific air temperature (columns) with a wind speed (rows) will show the wind chill equivalent and the approxi-
mate time to frostbite.
ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Winnebago
2068 I Winston-Salem (cid:2) Wister
Wintergreen (Gaultheria procumbens)
ROGER AND JOY SPURR—BRUCE COLEMAN INC./EB INC.
MASSACHUSETTS BAY COLONY. In 1629
he joined the Massachusetts Bay
Co., and he was elected governor of
the colony that was to be established
by the company in New England. An
ardent Puritan, he envisioned a
colony based on his religious beliefs.
He guided the colonists on his arrival
in North America in 1630 and was
elected governor 12 times during the
period from 1631 to 1648. Though
widely respected, he was criticized
for opposing the formation of a rep-
resentative assembly (1634), and the
colony’s
limitations on religious
freedom were decried by ROGER WIL-
LIAMS and ANNE HUTCHINSON. His son,
John Winthrop, detail of an oil paint-
ing, school of Sir Anthony Van Dyck, c.
1625–49; in the collection of the
American Antiquarian Society,
Worcester, Mass.
COURTESY OF THE AMERICAN ANTIQUARIAN SOCIETY,
WORCESTER, MASS.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
COURTESY OF THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, WASHINGTON,
THEODORE
Wister
ROOSEVELT.
wisteria or wistaria
in 1947 to live in seclusion in Ireland and then with various friends. Diag-
nosed with terminal cancer in 1949, he continued working intensively
until two days before his death. See also ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY.
Wolff
speaker and lobbyist who also led the World’s Woman’s Christian Tem-
perance Union from its founding in 1883. The WCTU was instrumental
in promoting nationwide temperance and in the eventual adoption of PRO-
HIBITION.
Wonder, Stevie orig. Steveland Judkins later Steveland
Wonders of the World, Seven See SEVEN WONDERS OF THE WORLD
Wonhy£ Daisa
wood alcohol See METHANOL
Wood Buffalo National Park Park, western Canada. Situated
between ATHABASCA and GREAT SLAVE lakes, it was established in 1922; it
occupies an area of 17,300 sq mi (44,807 sq km). The world’s largest
park, it is a vast region of forests and plains, crossed by the PEACE RIVER
and dotted with lakes. The habitat of the largest remaining herd of wood
buffalo (BISON) on the North American continent, as well as of bear, cari-
bou, moose, and beaver, it also provides nesting grounds for the endan-
gered WHOOPING CRANE.
Drake wood duck (Aix sponsa)
GRANT HEILMAN
1846. See also STAFFORDSHIRE FIGURE.
wood louse See PILL BUG, SOW BUG
wood mouse See FIELD MOUSE
wood rat or pack rat Any of 22 species (genus Neotoma, family
Cricetidae) of RODENTS that are nocturnal vegetarians of North and Cen-
tral American deserts, forests, and mountains. Wood rats are buff, gray,
or reddish brown, usually with white undersides and feet. They have large
ears and are 9–19 in. (23–47 cm) long, including the 3–9-in. (8–24-cm)
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Wood (cid:2) Woodhull
POLL WARBLER; CHAT; REDSTART.
Woodhull, Victoria orig. Victoria Claflin (b. Sept. 23, 1838,
FLUTE, piccolo, CLARINET, OBOE, ENGLISH HORN, and BASSOON. Other woodwinds
include the SAXOPHONE, RECORDER, PANPIPE, SHAKUHACHI, and SHAWM.
Woolf
Woodland culture Any of the prehistoric cultures of eastern North
America dating from the 1st millennium BC. The category includes cul-
tures such as the ADENA and HOPEWELL. Woodland cultures were character-
ized by the raising of corn, beans, and squash, the fashioning of distinctive
pottery, the use of the bow and arrow, and the building of burial mounds.
Most of these cultures were replaced by the MISSISSIPPIAN CULTURE in the 1st
millennium AD.
woodpecker Any of about 180 species (family Picidae) of mostly
nonmigratory, solitary birds found nearly worldwide. Woodpeckers spi-
ral up tree trunks, probing for insects, and chisel nest holes in dead wood
by means of rapidly repeating blows of the beak. Though they spend their
entire life in trees, only the few ground-feeding species can perch. Some
species eat fruits and berries or tree sap. Woodpeckers are usually silent,
except in spring, when males call loudly and drum on hollow wood. Spe-
cies range from 6 to 18 in. (15 to 46 cm) long. All have a straight, chisel-
like bill, and most are patterned in black, white, or yellow and bright
colours. See also FLICKER; IVOR Y-BILLED WOODPECKER; SAPSUCKER.
Woodstock in full Woodstock Music and Art Fair ROCK MUSIC
outlets. Its stores continued to proliferate in the U.S. and Britain, and it
acquired other chains dealing in sportswear, shoes, and children’s wear.
From 1992 it began closing hundreds of stores and selling off subsidiar-
ies; in 1998 it changed its name to Venator Group, Inc., and announced
its intention to focus on sporting goods. In 2001 the company name was
changed to Foot Locker, Inc.
wootz (steel)
2076 I working dog (cid:2) World Trade Center
over industry. It was formed in 1919 to resist the central party’s increas-
ing control over local party units and trade unions. In 1920 it objected to
LEON TROTSKY’s plan to transform trade unions into state organs. Led by
ALEKSANDRA KOLLONTAY and others, the group insisted that the unions, as
true representatives of
the proletariat, should control
the national
economy. At the 10th Party Congress (1921), its platform was rejected
and it was ordered to disperse.
working dog Any of various breeds of dog bred as guard, herding,
draft, or rescue animals. Breeds range from medium to large, but all are
sturdy and muscular, intelligent and loyal. Guard breeds include the AKITA,
BOXER, bullmastiff, DOBERMAN PINSCHER, giant and standard SCHNAUZERS, GREAT
DANE, MASTIFF, and ROTTWEILER. Livestock guard breeds include the Great
Pyrenees, komondor (Hungary), kuvasz (Tibet), and Pyrenean mountain
dogs (Britain). Herding dogs include the GERMAN SHEPHERD, SHETLAND SHEEP-
DOG, and WELSH CORGI. Breeds developed for hauling and rescue work
include the BERNESE MOUNTAIN DOG, Portuguese water dog, NEWFOUNDLAND,
ST. BERNARD, and SLED DOG.
Works Progress Administration See WPA
the INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT (IBRD; its main
component), the International Development Association (IDA), the Inter-
national Finance Corporation (IFC), the Multilateral Investment Guaran-
tee Agency (MIGA), and the International Center for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ICSID). The IDA (founded 1960) makes interest-
free loans to the bank’s poorest member countries. The IFC (founded
1956) lends to private businesses in developing countries. The MIGA
(founded 1985) supports national and private agencies that encourage for-
eign direct investment by offering insurance against noncommercial risks.
The ICSID (founded 1966) was developed to relieve the IBRD of the bur-
den of settling investment disputes. See also INTERNATIONAL MONETAR Y FUND.
World Council of Churches (WCC) Christian ecumenical organi-
World Court See INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
World Cup Major international FOOTBALL (soccer) competition. The tour-
nament brings together 32 qualifying national teams from around the
world, culminating in a match between the two top teams. It has been
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
World Health Organization (WHO) Public-health agency of the
Selected UNESCO World Heritage sites
site*
country
notes
site*
country
notes
Africa
Abu Ruwaysh
Aksum
Carthage
Dahshur
Gorée Island
Great Zimbabwe
Hadar
Karnak
Kilimanjaro
Kings, Valley of the
Lalibela
Leptis Magna
Luxor
Marrakech
Memphis
Mount Kenya
Ngorongoro
Olduvai Gorge
Philae
Saqqarah
Serengeti
Thebes
Timbuktu
Victoria Falls
Virunga
Ajanta Caves
Angkor
Ayutthaya
Baikal, Lake
Borobudur
Chogha Zanbil
Damascus
Delhi
Elephanta Island
Ellora Caves
Everest, Mount
Forbidden City
Great Wall of China
Ha Long Bay
Hatra
Hiroshima
Horyu Temple
Jerusalem
Kandy
Khiva
Kyoto
Lahore
Palmyra
Petra
Potala Palace
Qin tomb
San‘a’
Sundarbans
Taj Mahal
Ujong-Kulon
Zhoukoudian
Egypt
Ethiopia
Tunisia
Egypt
Egypt
Senegal
Zimbabwe
Ethiopia
Egypt
Tanzania
Egypt
Ethiopia
Libya
Egypt
Morocco
Egypt
Kenya
Tanzania
Tanzania
Egypt
Egypt
Tanzania
Egypt
Zambia
and Zimbabwe
Congo (Kinshasa)
archaeological remains
historic monuments
remains of ancient city
pyramids and funerary complex
pyramids and funerary complex
slave-trading depot
ruins of Shona capital
early hominid remains
Theban temple ruins
montane national park and reserve
Theban necropolis
rock-hewn medieval churches
remains of Roman architecture
Theban ruins
historic medina
remains of ancient city
national park and forest reserve
wildlife conservation area
early hominid remains
Nubian monuments
step pyramid and funerary complex
national park, wildlife refuge
ruins of ancient Egyptian capital
medieval center of Islamic culture
national parks, cataracts, Zambezi River,
rainforest, and wildlife
national park, diversity of habitats
India
Cambodia
Thailand
Russia
Indonesia
Syria
India
India
India
Nepal
China
China
Vietnam
Japan
Japan
Vietnam
Israel
Sri Lanka
Uzbekistan
Japan
Pakistan
Syria
Jordan
China
China
Yemen
Bangladesh
and India
India
Lebanon
Indonesia
China
rock-cut Buddhist monasteries
archaeological remains
ruins of capital complex
unique freshwater environment
Buddhist temple compound
ruins of Elamite city
historic city center
historic monuments and tomb
Hindu cave temple
Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina cave temples
montane national park
imperial palace in Beijing
extensive fortification
picturesque island group
ruins of Parthian city
peace memorial
Buddhist monuments
imperial citadel
Jewish, Islamic, Christian holy city
sacred Buddhist city
Islamic architecture
historic imperial capital
Mughal fortress, palace, gardens
ruins of ancient city
remains of ancient city
former residence of the Dalai Lama, in
Lhasa, Tibet
archaeological site, terra-cotta army
historic architecture
national park (India), sanctuary,
mangrove forest and wetlands
monumental funerary complex
ruins of three millennia of habitation
national park and reserve on Java
early hominid habitation
Australia and Oceania
Great Barrier Reef
Australia
Lord Howe Island
Australia
Rennell Island
Solomon Islands
Shark Bay
Australia
Uluru (Ayers Rock)
Australia
marine national park
diversity of habitats
unique island ecosystem
rare marine and terrestrial life-forms
national park, sandstone monolith
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Europe
Acropolis of Athens
Alhambra
Altamira
Amiens Cathedral
Arles
Auschwitz
Avebury
Bergen
Canterbury
Chartres Cathedral
Delphi
Ferrara
Florence
Fontainebleau
Giant’s Causeway
Granada
Hadrian’s Wall
Herculaneum
Istanbul
Kraków (Cracow)
Lascaux Grotto
Lübeck
Luxembourg city
Metéora
Mont-Saint-Michel
Moscow
Naples
Olympia
Palatine Chapel
(Aachen Cathedral)
Paris
Pompeii
Porto (Oporto)
Prague
Reims Cathedral
Rhodes
Rila Monastery
Saint Petersburg
Salzburg
Samos
Santiago
Segovia
Split
Stonehenge
Tallinn
Toledo
Transylvania
Vatican City
Venice
Versailles
Visby
North America
Banff
Chaco Canyon
Chichén Itzá
Cocos Island
Copán
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Havana
Hawaii Volcanoes
Jasper
Kluane
Kootenay
L’Anse aux
Meadows
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mexico City
Palenque
Greece
Spain
Spain
France
France
Poland
England
Norway
Switzerland
England
France
Greece
Italy
Italy
France
Northern Ireland
Spain
England
Italy
Turkey
Poland
France
Germany
Luxembourg
Greece
France
Russia
Italy
Greece
Germany
France
Italy
Portugal
Czech Republic
France
Greece
Bulgaria
Russia
Austria
Greece
Spain
Spain
Croatia
England
Estonia
Spain
Romania
Vatican City
Italy
France
Sweden
Canada
United States
Mexico
Costa Rica
Honduras
United States
United States
United States
Canada
Canada
Canada
Canada
United States
United States
Mexico
Mexico
complex of monuments
Moorish palace and fortress
prehistoric cave paintings
Romanesque and Gothic styles
Roman, Romanesque monuments
Nazi concentration camp
prehistoric megalith group
Hanseatic wharf
medieval city center
cathedral and abbey
Gothic architecture
remains of sanctuary complex
Renaissance architecture
historic city center
royal château and gardens
coastal rock formations
Moorish, Andalusian structures
Roman fortification
ruins of Vesuvius-destroyed town
numerous historic sites
medieval city center
prehistoric cave paintings
Hanseatic architecture
fortifications and old city
Orthodox Christian monasteries
medieval village and abbey
Kremlin and Red Square
historic city center
ruins of ancient sacred city
imperial chapel of Charlemagne,
Carolingian and Gothic styles
banks of Seine River
ruins of Vesuvius-destroyed town
historic city center
historic city center
High Gothic architecture
medieval city center
cradle of Bulgarian “National Revival”
historic city center and monuments
historic city center
ancient port and temple remains
old city and pilgrimage route
old town and Roman aqueduct
Roman palace, other monuments
prehistoric megalith group
historic city center
historic structures
Saxon fortified churches, villages
seat of Roman Catholic church
island city and surrounding lagoon
royal palace and park
historic Hanseatic town
national park, Rocky Mountains
historical park, Pueblo ruins
Mayan-Toltec architecture
national park, forest and marine life
remains of major Mayan city
subarctic national park, preserve
national park
colonial city center
national park
national park, Rocky Mountains
subarctic national park
national park, Rocky Mountains
remains of medieval Norse settlement in
Newfoundland
cave system and national park
prehistoric cliff dwellings
historic city center
national park, Mayan city
2078 I World Trade Organization (cid:2) World War II
Selected UNESCO World Heritage sites (continued)
site*
country
notes
site*
country
notes
North America (continued)
Santo Domingo
Dominican Rep.
Statue of Liberty
United States
Teotihuacán
Mexico
Tikal
Guatemala
Uxmal
Mexico
Wrangell-St. Elias
United States
Xochimilco
Mexico
Yellowstone
United States
Canada
South America
Arequipa
Brasília
Cartagena
Chan Chan
Colonia del
Sacramento
Brazil
Colombia
Uruguay
colonial city
national monument
extensive pre-Hispanic ruins
national park, Mayan ruins
Mayan city and ceremonial center
subarctic national park, preserve
Aztec canals and floating gardens
national park, geothermal formations
national park, Rocky Mountains
colonial architecture
urban planning and architecture
colonial port, fortresses, monuments
ruins of pre-Inca Chimú capital
Portuguese, Spanish colonial
architecture
South America (continued)
Córdoba
Argentina
Venezuela
Cuzco
Easter Island
Chile
Galapagos Islands
Ecuador
Huascarán, Mount
Iguaçu (Iguazú)
Brazil and
Argentina
Colombia
and Panama
Brazil
Bolivia
Ecuador
Argentina
Los Kaitos
and Darién
Machu Picchu
Nazca Lines
Pantanal
Potosí
Quito
Valdés Peninsula
Jesuit institutions and estates
Spanish, Dutch, local architecture
Inca and colonial architecture
monumental sculptures
national park, unique ecosystem
montane national park
national parks, waterfalls, subtropical
rainforests
national parks on the frontier, rainforest,
wetlands
Inca ruins
extensive geoglyphs
freshwater wetland ecosystem
colonial industrial city
colonial city center
seals, whales
*The spelling or styling of place-names in this table may differ from those given on the World Heritage List; in addition, some place-names represent one or more 
constituent parts of larger World Heritage sites.
towers, as well as adjacent buildings, collapsed into enormous piles of
debris. The attacks claimed the lives of some 2,750 people. Thousands
more were injured. See SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACKS.
World Trade Organization (WTO) INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION
LUSITANIA; PARIS PEACE CONFERENCE; Treaties of BREST-LITOVSK, NEUILLY, SAINT-
GERMAIN, SÈVRES, TRIANON, and VERSAILLES; EDMUND H.H. ALLENBY, FERDINAND
FOCH, JOHN FRENCH, DOUGLAS HAIG, PAUL VON HINDENBURG, JOSEPH-JACQUES-
CÉSAIRE JOFFRE, ERICH LUDENDORFF, JOHN PERSHING.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
worm Any of thousands of species of unrelated INVERTEBRATE animals that
typically have a soft, slender, elongated body with no appendages. The
major phyla are Platyhelminthes (FLATWORMS), Annelida (ANNELIDS, or seg-
mented worms), Nemertea (ribbon worms), Acanthocephala (spiny-
headed worms), and Aschelminthes (NEMATODES and others). There are
several minor phyla. Length ranges from microscopic (e.g., some aschel-
minths) to more than 100 ft (30 m) (some ribbon worms). Worms are
found worldwide on land and in water. They may be parasitic or free-
living and are important as soil conditioners, parasites, and a link in the
food chain in all ecosystems. See also FLUKE, PINWORM, POLYCHAETE, ROTIFER,
TAPEWORM, TUBE WORM.
Worms
IPPINE SEA; CASABLANCA, POTSDAM, TEHRAN, and YALTA conferences; DUNKIRK
EVACUATION; LEND-LEASE; MUNICH AGREEMENT; NÜRNBERG TRIALS; Siege of LENIN-
GRAD; SINO-JAPANESE WARS; OMAR BRADLEY, WINSTON CHURCHILL, DWIGHT D.
EISENHOWER, DOUGLAS MACARTHUR, BERNARD LAW MONTGOMER Y, BENITO MUS-
SOLINI, GEORGE PATTON, ERWIN ROMMEL, FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT, JOSEPH STALIN,
YAMAMOTO ISOROKU, GEORGY K. ZHUKOV.
World Wildlife Fund or World Wide Fund for Nature Larg-
Wotan See ODIN
he was engaged to design the Shel-
donian Theatre at Oxford. Though
Classical in form, the theatre was
roofed with novel wood trusses that
were the product of Wren’s scholarly
and empirical approach. As King’s
Surveyor of Works (1669–1718), he
had a hand in the rebuilding of more
than 50 churches destroyed in the
GREAT FIRE OF LONDON. Meanwhile, he
was evolving designs for SAINT PAUL’S
CATHEDRAL, a work that occupied him
until its completion in 1710. Other
works, generally in the English
Baroque style, include the classical
Trinity College library, Cambridge
(1676–84), additions to Hampton
Court (begun 1689), and Greenwich
Hospital (begun 1696). Wren was
buried in Saint Paul’s; nearby is the
famous inscription: “Reader, if you
seek a monument, look around.”
wrench or spanner Tool, usu-
Sir Christopher Wren, detail of an oil
painting by Sir Godfrey Kneller, 1711;
in the National Portrait Gallery, Lon-
COURTESY OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY,
LONDON
Wright, Frances known as Fanny Wright (b. Sept. 6, 1795,
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
wrench (cid:2) writ
Wright, Mickey orig. Mary Kathryn Wright (b. Feb. 14, 1935,
Wright, Wilbur; and Wright, Orville (respectively b. April 16,
GLENN H. CURTISS.
monument was established in 1924 and comprises more than 800 red
sandstone pueblos built during the 11th–13th centuries. It has an area of
55 sq mi (142 sq km).
Wuppertal
Wynette
X-ray ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION of extremely short WAVELENGTH (100
nanometres to 0.001 nanometre) produced by the deceleration of charged
particles or the transitions of ELECTRONs in atoms. X-rays travel at the speed
of light and exhibit phenomena associated with WAVEs, but experiments
indicate that they can also behave like particles (see WAVE-PARTICLE DUALITY).
On the ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM, they lie between GAMMA RAYs and ULTRA-
Xanthus
xerography
Xi’an
XML in full Extensible Markup Language. MARKUP LANGUAGE
Xochicalco
Y2K bug or Year 2000 bug or millennium bug Potential prob-
Ya-lung River See YALONG RIVER
yacht
yam Any of several plant species of the genus Dioscorea (family
Dioscoreaceae, or yam family), native to warmer regions of both hemi-
spheres. A number of species are cultivated for food in the tropics; in cer-
tain tropical cultures, notably of West Africa and New Guinea, the yam
is the primary agricultural commodity and the focal point of elaborate
ritual. The edible tuberous roots, which vary in taste from sweet to bitter
to tasteless, are eaten as cooked starchy vegetables. Often boiled and then
mashed, they may also be fried, roasted, or baked. True yams are botani-
cally distinct from the SWEET POTATO, though in the U.S. the names are
commonly interchanged. Dioscorea mexicana contains a chemical that
can suppress ovulation in humans and is used as the basis for birth-control
pills. The so-called yam bean is the legume JICAMA.
was to become the GRAND CANAL network. He embarked on military cam-
paigns in Vietnam and Inner Asia. Three expeditions to Korea were so
disastrous that the Chinese people turned against him; he was assassinated
in southern China. One of his former officials reunited the empire and
established the TANG DYNASTY. See also WENDI.
Yangôn
lowlands. Since the construction and expansion of the Yarqon-Negev
Project in the 1950s (see NEGEV), the water level has gone down, and pol-
lution has increased. During World War I (1914–18), it was the site of
several important British victories over the Ottoman Empire in the Allied
Powers’ conquest of Palestine.
yarrow
sia. An ironworks was established in 1721, and a fortress, named after
Empress CATHERINE I, was founded there in 1722. It grew as the centre for
all the ironworks of the URAL MOUNTAINS region, and its importance
increased with the building of a highway (1783) and the TRANS-SIBERIAN
RAILROAD. It achieved notoriety as the place where Tsar NICHOLAS II and his
family were held prisoner and executed by the BOLSHEVIKs in 1918. In 1924
it was renamed Sverdlovsk in honour of YAKOV SVERDLOV. The city reverted
to its original name after the breakup of the U.S.S.R. in 1991. It is a major
industrial centre, especially for heavy machinery.
Yelizavetpol See GÄNCÄ
yellow bunting See YELLOWHAMMER
Yellow Emperor See HUANGDI
yellow fever Acute infectious tropical disease, sometimes occurring in
temperate zones. Abrupt onset of headache, backache, fever, nausea, and
vomiting is followed by either recovery with immunity or by higher fever,
slow pulse, and vomiting of blood. Patients may die in a week. JAUNDICE is
common (hence the name). One of the world’s great plagues for 300 years,
it is caused by a virus transmitted by several species of mosquitoes. CARLOS
FINLAY suggested and WALTER REED proved this means of spread, leading to
near elimination of the disease through mosquito control (see WILLIAM GOR-
GAS). Treatment consists of supportive care, particularly fever reduction.
Control of mosquitoes near cities and live-virus vaccines—developed by
Max Theiler (1899–1972), who won a 1951 Nobel Prize for his work—
have made yellow fever completely preventable.
yellow jacket Any of 35–40 species (genus Dolichovespula or Vesp-
ula) of social WASPS, principally of the Northern Hemisphere, named for
the black bands on its yellow abdomen. They differ from other wasps in
having their wings folded longitudinally when at rest. Dolichovespula
species typically build exposed nests. Vespula species build concealed
nests underground or in protected cavities; when a nest is stepped on, the
colony may erupt in an angry, stinging swarm. Nest size varies widely;
some nests can be held in one hand, whereas nests in warmer climates
may weigh half a ton.
yellow journalism In newspaper publishing, the use of lurid features
and sensationalized news in newspaper publishing to attract readers and
increase circulation. The phrase was coined in the 1890s to describe tac-
tics employed in the furious competition between two New York papers,
JOSEPH PULITZER’s World and WILLIAM RANDOLPH HEARST’s Journal. When
Hearst hired away from Pulitzer a cartoonist who had drawn the
immensely popular comic strip “The Yellow Kid,” another cartoonist was
hired to draw the comic for the World; the rivalry excited so much atten-
tion that the competition was dubbed yellow journalism. Techniques of
the period that became permanent features of U.S. journalism include
banner headlines, coloured comics, and copious illustrations.
yellow poplar See TULIP TREE
Yellow River See HUANG HE
Yellow Sea Chinese Huang Hai
COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES
Yelü Chucai or Yeh-lü Ch’u-
ts’ai
theological seminary. Today the university is independent, although its
curriculum emphasizes Jewish culture and history. Yeshiva consists of a
liberal arts college, a college for women, a college of Hebraic studies, and
the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, as well as schools of Judaic
studies, Talmudic studies, business, law (the Cardozo School), social
work, education, and graduate studies, among others.
Yeti See ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN
Yevtushenko
Yijing or I Ching
Yongle emperor or Yung-lo emperor
Yoruba
(1874–1962) in Paris. The Young Plan, a revision of the DAWES PLAN,
reduced the amount due from Germany to $26.3 billion, to be paid over
59 years, and ended foreign controls on German economic life. It went
into effect in 1930, but the world depression affected Germany’s ability
to pay. When ADOLF HITLER came to power in 1933, he repudiated the obli-
gations of the Treaty of VERSAILLES, including reparations.
Young Tunisians Political party formed in 1907 by French-educated
Tunisian intellectuals to oppose French rule. They demanded complete
control of the country’s government and administration and full citizen-
ship rights for both Tunisians and Frenchmen. They protested the Italian
invasion of Libya (1911) and rioted against French actions at home. The
French exiled its leaders, driving the party underground until 1920, when
it reemerged and reorganized itself as the Destour Party, which remained
active until 1957. See also HABIB BOURGUIBA.
Young Turks Turkish Jöntürkler Coalition of young dissidents who
ended the sultanate of the OTTOMAN EMPIRE. Consisting of college students
and dissident soldiers, the group succeeded in 1908 in forcing ABDÜLHA-
MID II to reinstitute the 1876 constitution and recall the legislature. They
deposed him the following year, reorganized the government, and began
modernizing and industrializing Turkish society. They joined the CENTRAL
POWERS during World War I (1914–18). Facing defeat, they resigned a
month before the war ended. See also MUSTAFA KEMAL ATATÜRK; ENVER PASHA;
MIDHAT PASHA.
Younghusband, Sir Francis Edward (b. May 31, 1863, Murree,
Yourcenar
NATIONAL LIBERATION FRONT.
Young Men’s Christian Association See YMCA
Young Plan (1929) Renegotiation of Germany’s World War I REPARA-
TIONS payments by a committee chaired by the U.S. lawyer Owen D. Young
cerned about the health of young people breathing polluted air in industrial
cities. Common in Germany in the early 1900s, youth hostels spread
through Europe and other parts of the world after World War I, and an
international organization was formed in 1932; currently known as Hos-
telling International and based in London,
its membership includes
national federations in more than 60 countries, comprising some 4,000
hostels. Some hostels still impose age limits.
Ypres
Yue Fei or Yüeh Fei
QUARKs.
Zambia’s northern boundaries, and Lake
Bangweulu and the Bangweulu Swamps
form extensive wetlands farther
to the
south. The Muchinga Mountains in the east
and the ranges along the eastern border
have the highest elevations in the country. There are forests of Zambezi
teak in the southwest. Zambia’s economy depends heavily on the pro-
duction and export of copper. Other important mineral resources include
lead, zinc, cobalt, coal, and gold. Agriculture also is important. There is
some manufacturing. Zambia is a republic with one legislative house; its
head of state and government is the president. Ancestors of the Tonga
reached the region early in the 2nd millennium AD, but other peoples from
Congo (Kinshasa) and Angola reached the country only in the 17th–18th
century. Portuguese trading missions were established early in the 18th
century. Emissaries of CECIL RHODES and the British South Africa Company
concluded treaties with most of the Zambian chiefs during the 1890s. The
company administered the region known as Northern Rhodesia until 1924,
when it became a British protectorate. It was part of the Central African
Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland in 1953–63. In 1964 Northern
Rhodesia became independent as the Republic of Zambia. A constitutional
amendment enacted in 1991 allowed opposition parties. However, the
country continued to experience political tension and government corrup-
tion.
Zamboanga
a commercial and manufacturing centre for an agricultural area that pro-
duces corn, sugarcane, cotton, fruits and vegetables, and livestock. Bee-
keeping and tourism also contribute to the economy. The 17th-century
Basilica of Zapopan is the site of annual pilgrimages.
Zaporizhzhya
Zechariah
Zeno of Elea
Zhang Daoling or Chang Tao-ling
wake of these missions, resulting in Chinese colonization of Southeast
Asia and consequent tributary trade that lasted into the 19th century.
Zhengzhou
Zhu Yuanzhang See HONGWU EMPEROR
Zhuangzi or Chuang-tzu
Zimmermann
autoharp, cimbalom, DULCIMER, KOTO, and even the CLAVICHORD, HARPSICHORD,
and PIANO.
Zoan See TANIS
zodiac
DAVID BEN-GURION, HAGANA, VLADIMIR JABOTINSKY, IRGUN ZVAI LEUMI.
MENT, one of the TRANSITION ELEMENTs,
scripture. Zoroastrianism enjoyed status as an official religion at various
times before the advent of ISLAM, but Zoroastrians were persecuted in the
8th–10th centuries, and some left Iran to settle in India. By the 19th cen-
tury these Indian Zoroastrians, or PARSIs, were noted for their wealth and
education. The small group of Zoroastrians remaining in Iran are known
as the GABARs.
Zorrilla
Zürich
Encyclopædia Britannica
Jacob E. Safra, Chairman of the Board
Jorge Aguilar-Cauz, President
EDITORIAL
Dale H. Hoiberg, Senior Vice President 
and Editor
Anita Wolff, Deputy Editor
Marsha Mackenzie, Managing
Editor and Director of Production
Michael Levy, Senior Manager, 
Editorial Projects
Robert Curley, Senior Editor
Brian Duignan, Senior Editor
Kathleen Kuiper, Senior Editor
Kenneth Pletcher, Senior Editor
Jeffrey Wallenfeldt, Senior Editor
Charles Cegielski, Associate Editor
Michael Frassetto, Associate Editor
James Hennelly, Associate Editor
William L. Hosch, Associate Editor
Michael R. Hynes, Associate Editor
Amy McKenna, Associate Editor
Tom Michael, Associate Editor
Sarah Forbes Orwig, Associate Editor
Amy Tikkanen, Associate Editor
Kathleen B. Sheetz, Executive Assistant
ART DEPARTMENT
Kathy Nakamura, Senior Media Editor
David Alexovich, Manager, 
Illustration
Thomas J. Spanos, Lead Electronic 
Illustrator
Christine McCabe, Illustrator
Jerry Kraus, Illustrator
Katherine D. Burgess, Assistant Illustrator
Claudiu Varan, Assistant Illustrator
CARTOGRAPHY
Michael Nutter, Map Editor
COMPOSITION TECHNOLOGY
AND DESIGN
Steven N. Kapusta, Director
Cate Nichols, Compositor
Lara C. Mondae, Designer
COPY DEPARTMENT
Sylvia Wallace, Director
Julian Ronning, Supervisor
Joan Lackowski, Special Projects Supervisor
J.E. Luebering, Senior Copy Editor
Jennifer Mack, Senior Copy Editor
René Ostberg, Copy Editor
Marya Park, Copy Editor
Michael Ray, Copy Editor
EDITORIAL TECHNOLOGIES
Steven Bosco, Director
Gavin Chiu, Principal Engineer
Bruce Walters, Systems Coordinator
Mark Wiechec, Principal Engineer
PUBLISHING TECHNOLOGIES
Lisa Braucher, Data Editor
MEDIA ASSET MANAGEMENT
Jeannine Deubel, Manager
Kimberly L. Cleary, Supervisor, 
Illustration Control
Kurt Heintz, Media Production Technician
PRODUCTION CONTROL
Marilyn Barton, Senior Coordinator
REFERENCE LIBRARY
Henry Bolzon, Head Librarian
Lars Mahinske, Geography Curator
Sandra Jo Freeman, Library Assistant
MANUFACTURING
Kim Gerber, Director
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Merriam-Webster
The following is the editorial staff of Merriam-Webster that contributed to
Merriam-Webster ’s Collegiate Encyclopedia:
Editor: Mark A. Stevens; Associate Editors: Jocelyn White Franklin, Francesca M. Forrest, Kathleen M. Doherty; 
Art Coordinator: Lynn Stowe Tomb; Pronunciation Editor: David B. Justice
MERRIAM-WEBSTER CONSULTANTS: Anne Agur (University of Toronto), Robert Audi (University of Nebraska), Carol Berkin
(Baruch College, City University of New York), Paul Bottino (University of Maryland), Brian Burrell (University of
Massachusetts), Louis P. Cain (Loyola University Chicago, Northwestern University), Francis D. K. Ching (University of
Washington), Dale F. Eickelman (Dartmouth College), John A. Garraty (Columbia University [emeritus]), Robert B.
Gordon (Yale University), James J. Jenkins (University of South Florida), John W. Johnson (University of Northern Iowa),
Daniel Kaiser (Sarah Lawrence College), Cornelis Klein (University of New Mexico), Joel Krieger (Wellesley College),
James M. Powell (Syracuse University [emeritus]), Edwin D. Reilly, Jr. (SUNY-Albany [emeritus]), Conrad Schirokauer
(Columbia University), Stephen L. Schneider (University of Massachusetts), Thomas E. Skidmore (Brown University),
Fredric P. Smoler (Sarah Lawrence College), Graham Speake (Oxford University), William C. Summers (Yale University),
Christine Sutton (Oxford University), Birdsall S. Viault (Winthrop University [emeritus]), David K. Wyatt (Cornell
University), Mark J. Zucker (Louisiana State University)
MERRIAM-WEBSTER EDITORIAL STAFF: Michael G. Belanger, Susan L. Brady, Deanna Chiasson, Jennifer N. Cislo, Robert D.
Copeland, Joanne M. Despres, Florence A. Fowler, Daniel J. Hopkins, Joan I. Narmontas, Kara L. Noble, Madeline L.
Novak, Seán O’Mannion-Espejo, Roger J. Pease, Stephen J. Perrault, Thomas F. Pitoniak, James L. Rader, Donna L.
Rickerby, Michael D. Roundy, Maria A. Sansalone, Adrienne M. Scholz, Michael Shally-Jensen, Peter A. Sokolowski,
Karen L. Wilkinson
Particular acknowledgment is due to Jennifer Cislo, who fact-checked the great majority of the encyclopedia’s entries;
Mike Roundy, who advised on a range of scientific and technical subject areas; Deanna Chiasson, who coordinated the
provision of pronunciations; Jim Rader, who served as language consultant; Steve Perrault, who served as sports consult-
ant; Dan Hopkins, who acted as in-house cartography coordinator; Roger Pease, who drew up the botany and zoology
entry lists; Joan Narmontas, who oversaw creation of the biological diagrams; Seán O’Mannion-Espejo and Peter
Sokolowski, who wrote many of the music articles; Karen Wilkinson, who prepared many of the tables; Robert Copeland,
who handled the file conversions; and Adrienne Scholz, who proofread virtually the entire volume. Mike Shally-Jensen
contributed valuable analyses and many hundreds of articles in the project’s early stages.
MERRIAM-WEBSTER FREELANCE STAFF: Michael J. Anderson, Cynthia Susan Ashby, Arlene Bensam, Frank Calvillo, May K.
Chapman, Mary Wood Cornog, Lori Dirks, Jennifer Goss Duby, Elizabeth Morris Ewell, Amy Fass, Sharon Goldstein,
Mary Catherine Hager, Helen Downs Haller, Orin K. Hargraves, Stephanie Hiebert, Betty B. Hoskins, Patricia Hurley
Jarden, Anthony P. Johnson, Frances Kianka, Mark L. Koontz, Polly Kummel, Lynne Lackenbach, Ellen S. Leach, Arthur
Maisel, Danny Marcus, Marvin Martin, Doris Maxfield, Wayne F. Moquin, Caroline Power, Margo Quinto, Mary H.
Russell, Barbara H. Salazar, Fran Shonfeld Sherman, Elizabeth Stevens, Jeri Stolk, Barbara R. Tepperman, Deborah J.
Untener, Helen M. Webber, Holly Isabella Webber
The project owes special thanks to Mike Anderson, Susan Ashby, Amy Fass, Mary Catherine Hager, Helen Haller,
Stephanie Hiebert, Polly Kummel, Lynne Lackenbach, Barbara Salazar, and Holly Webber for their unusually 
extensive work.
OTHER CONTRIBUTORS: Tech-Graphics Corporation of Atlantic Highlands, N.J., produced the encyclopedia’s diagrams. John
Nelson provided its maps. Susana Darwin and Amor Montes de Oca selected and prepared the photographs from the
Encyclopædia Britannica collection. Mark Diller drew up the religion entry list. Ellen Sullivan Farley and Loree Hany
assisted in technical preparation of the art. Dale Good served as consultant on project management. Ted Atanowski pro-
vided computer assistance. The text was typeset by the Clarinda Co. of Clarinda, Iowa, under the exemplary direction of
Dee Hughes. Finally, John M. Morse, publisher of Merriam-Webster, conceived the encyclopedia more than 20 years
before its publication and offered indispensable support and encouragement throughout its development.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Flags of the World l Plate 1
Flags of the World l Plate 1
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra*
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria*
Azerbaijan
The Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
MBRA . F
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia*
Plate 2 l
Flags of the World
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
O R D E M
P RO G
Brunei
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Costa Rica*
Coˆ te d’Ivoire
Croatia
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Flags of the World l Plate 3
Flags of the World l Plate 3
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic*
East Timor
Ecuador*
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Finland*
France
Gabon
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
The Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Plate 4 l
Flags of the World
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
L I B
L I B
T I E M B R E
T I E M B R E
D E 1 8 2 1
D E 1 8 2 1
Guatemala*
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti*
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Flags of the World l Plate 5
Flags of the World l Plate 5
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Madagascar
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
Malawˆ i
Malaysia
Maldives
Plate 6 l
Flags of the World
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia, Federated States of
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
The Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua*
Niger
Nigeria
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Flags of the World l Plate 7
Flags of the World l Plate 7
Norway
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru*
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Saint Kitts & Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint V incent & the Grenadines
Samoa
San Marino*
São Tomé and Príncipe
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
Plate 8 l
Flags of the World
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia and Montenegro
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
P L V S
V L TR
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Tanzania
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Flags of the World l Plate 9
Flags of the World l Plate 9
Thailand
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Vatican City
Venezuela*
V ietnam
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
C iv i l f lags are shown except where marked thus (*); in these cases, government f lags are shown in order to i l lustrate emb lems.
Both sty les are off ic ia l nat iona l f lags.
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Plate 10 l World Political Map
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
World Political Map l Plate 11
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Plate 12lWorld Religions
World Population Density 
World Populations
l Plate 13
Indigenous Skin Color
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Plate 14 l World Heritage sites
On this plate and the
adjoining one is a
sampling of official
World Heritage sites,
as designated by the
United Nations
Educational, Scientific
and Cultural
Organization
(UNESCO).
This page (clockwise):
Rose window, Notre-Dame
de Paris, 13th century;
terra-cotta warriors from
the 3rd-century BC Qin
tomb of Emperor
Shihuangdi, near Xi'an,
China; elephants and
acacia trees on the plain
near Kilimanjaro, Tanzania;
abundant and colourful sea
life on the Great Barrier
Reef, off the northeast
coast of Australia;
cruciform Coptic church
carved from solid rock, c.
13th century, Lalibela,
Ethiopia.
Plate 14: Photographs (clockwise from top left) The Bridgeman Art Library/Getty Images; Keren Su—Taxi/Getty Images; Renee Lynn—Stone/Getty Images;
Jeff Hunter—The Image Bank/Getty Images; Upperhall Ltd./Robert Harding World Imagery/Getty Images.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
World Heritage sites
l Plate 15
This page (clockwise from top
left) the pyramid El Castillo in the
Mayan city of Chichén Itzá,
founded 6th century AD, Yucatán,
Mexico; Temple of the Golden
Pavilion, Ky§to, Japan, 14th
century (rebuilt, 1955); the Taj
Mahal, built mainly 1632–43 by
Shah Jahan as a mausoleum for
his wife Mumtaz Mahal, Agra,
India; giant tortoise on Isabela
Island, Galapagos Islands, off
the coast of Ecuador; Anasazi
cliff dwellings, c. 1200, Mesa
Verde National Park, Colorado;
detail of a painted ceiling in Rila
Monastery, southwestern
Bulgaria.
Plate 15: Photographs (clockwise from top left) © Corbis; Kaz Mori—The Image Bank/Getty Images; Gavin Hellier—Robert Harding World Imagery/Getty Images;
Craig Lovell/Corbis; Walter Rawlings—Robert Harding World Imagery/Getty Images; © Corbis.
©  2006 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
International Time Zones
Plate 16l
